<div id="the_beginning">&nbsp;</div>
<div id="front_matter" class="section">
	<!-- <span class="pagenum"><a id="pageiii" name="pageiii"></a>iii</span> -->

	<p class="series_name">EVERYMAN&#8217;S LIBRARY</p>
	<p class="series_editors">Founded 1906 by J. M. Dent (d. 1926)<br />
	Edited by Ernest Rhys (d. 1946)</p>
	<p class="series_title">ESSAYS &amp; BELLES-LETTRES</p>
	<div id="this_book">
		<p>SARTOR RESARTUS <i>and</i> ON HEROES</p>
		<p>BY THOMAS CARLYLE · INTRODUCTION</p>
		<p>BY PROFESSOR W. H. HUDSON</p>
	</div>



	<!-- <span class="pagenum"><a id="pageiv" name="pageiv"></a>iv</span> -->

	<p class="about_author">THOMAS CARLYLE, born in 1795 at
	Ecclefechan, the son of a stonemason.
	Educated at Edinburgh University. Schoolmaster
	for a short time, but decided on a
	literary career, visiting Paris and London.
	Retired in 1828 to Dumfriesshire to write.
	In 1834 moved to Cheyne Row, Chelsea,
	and died there in 1881.</p>




	<!-- <span class="pagenum"><a id="pagev" name="pagev"></a>v</span> -->

	<div id="title_page">
		<h1>SARTOR RESARTUS</h1>
		<h1>ON HEROES</h1>
		<h1>HERO WORSHIP</h1>

		<h1 class="author">THOMAS CARLYLE</h1>
		<p class="publisher">LONDON: J. M. DENT &amp; SONS LTD.<br />
		NEW YORK: E. P. DUTTON &amp; CO. INC.</p>
	</div>

	<!-- <span class="pagenum"><a id="pagevi" name="pagevi"></a>vi</span> -->

	<p class="rights_statement">All rights reserved<br />
	Made in Great Britain<br />
	at The Temple Press Letchworth<br />
	for<br />
	J.M. Dent &amp; Sons Ltd.<br />
	Aldine House Bedford St. London<br />
	First published in this edition 1908<br />
	Last reprinted 1948</p>

</div>

<div id="introduction" class="section">
	<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="pagevii" name="pagevii"></a>vii</span></p>

	<h2 class="section_title">INTRODUCTION</h2>

	<p><span class="first_word">One</span> of the most vital and pregnant books in our modern
	literature, &#8220;Sartor Resartus&#8221; is also, in structure and
	form, one of the most daringly original. It defies exact
	classification. It is not a philosophic treatise. It is not
	an autobiography. It is not a romance. Yet in a sense
	it is all these combined. Its underlying purpose is to
	expound in broad outline certain ideas which lay at the
	root of Carlyle&#8217;s whole reading of life. But he does not
	elect to set these forth in regular methodic fashion, after
	the manner of one writing a systematic essay. He presents
	his philosophy in dramatic form and in a picturesque human
	setting. He invents a certain Herr Diogenes Teufelsdröckh,
	an erudite German professor of &#8220;Allerley-Wissenschaft,&#8221; or
	Things in General, in the University of Weissnichtwo, of
	whose colossal work, &#8220;Die Kleider, Ihr Werden und
	Wirken&#8221; (On Clothes: Their Origin and Influence), he
	represents himself as being only the student and interpreter.
	With infinite humour he explains how this prodigious
	volume came into his hands; how he was struck
	with amazement by its encyclopædic learning, and the depth
	and suggestiveness of its thought; and how he determined
	that it was his special mission to introduce its ideas to the
	British public. But how was this to be done? As a mere
	bald abstract of the original would never do, the would-be
	apostle was for a time in despair. But at length the happy
	thought occurred to him of combining a condensed statement
	of the main principles of the new philosophy with some
	account of the philosopher&#8217;s life and character. Thus the
	work took the form of a &#8220;Life and Opinions of Herr
	Teufelsdröckh,&#8221; and as such it was offered to the world.
	Here, of course, we reach the explanation of its fantastic
	title&#8212;&#8220;Sartor Resartus,&#8221; or the Tailor Patched: the tailor
	being the great German &#8220;Clothes-philosopher,&#8221; and the
	patching being done by Carlyle as his English editor.</p>

	<p>As a piece of literary mystification, Teufelsdröckh and
	<span class="pagenum"><a id="pageviii" name="pageviii"></a>viii</span>his treatise enjoyed a measure of the success which nearly
	twenty years before had been scored by Dietrich Knickerbocker
	and his &#8220;History of New York.&#8221; The question of
	the professor&#8217;s existence was solemnly discussed in at least
	one important review; Carlyle was gravely taken to task
	for attempting to mislead the public; a certain interested
	reader actually wrote to inquire where the original German
	work was to be obtained. All this seems to us surprising;
	the more so as we are now able to understand the purposes
	which Carlyle had in view in devising his dramatic scheme.
	In the first place, by associating the clothes-philosophy with
	the personality of its alleged author (himself one of
	Carlyle&#8217;s splendidly living pieces of characterisation), and
	by presenting it as the product and expression of his spiritual
	experiences, he made the mystical creed intensely human.
	Stated in the abstract, it would have been a mere blank
	<em>-ism</em>; developed in its intimate relations with Teufelsdröckh&#8217;s
	character and career, it is filled with the hot life-blood of
	natural thought and feeling. Secondly, by fathering his
	own philosophy upon a German professor Carlyle indicates
	his own indebtedness to German idealism, the ultimate
	source of much of his own teaching. Yet, deep as that
	indebtedness was, and anxious as he might be to acknowledge
	it, he was as a humourist keenly alive to certain
	glaring defects of the great German writers; to their
	frequent tendency to lose themselves among the mere
	minutiæ of erudition, and thus to confuse the unimportant
	and the important; to their habit of rising at times into the
	clouds rather than above the clouds, and of there disporting
	themselves in regions &#8220;close-bordering on the impalpable
	inane;&#8221; to their too conspicuous want of order, system,
	perspective. The dramatic machinery of &#8220;Sartor Resartus&#8221;
	is therefore turned to a third service. It is made the vehicle
	of much good-humoured satire upon these and similar characteristics
	of Teutonic scholarship and speculation; as in
	the many amusing criticisms which are passed upon
	Teufelsdröckh&#8217;s volume as a sort of &#8220;mad banquet wherein
	all courses have been confounded;&#8221; in the burlesque parade
	of the professor&#8217;s &#8220;omniverous reading&#8221; (<i>e.g.</i>, Book I,
	Chap. V); and in the whole amazing episode of the &#8220;six
	considerable paper bags,&#8221; out of the chaotic contents
	of which the distracted editor in search of &#8220;biographic
	<span class="pagenum"><a id="pageix" name="pageix"></a>ix</span>documents&#8221; has to make what he can. Nor is this quite all.
	Teufelsdröckh is further utilised as the mouthpiece of some
	of Carlyle&#8217;s more extravagant speculations and of such ideas
	as he wished to throw out as it were tentatively, and without
	himself being necessarily held responsible for them. There
	is thus much point as well as humour in those sudden turns
	of the argument, when, after some exceptionally wild outburst
	on his <i>eidolon&#8217;s</i> part, Carlyle sedately reproves him
	for the fantastic character or dangerous tendency of his
	opinions.</p>

	<p>It is in connection with the dramatic scheme of the book
	that the third element, that of autobiography, enters into
	its texture, for the story of Teufelsdröckh is very largely
	a transfigured version of the story of Carlyle himself. In
	saying this, I am not of course thinking mainly of Carlyle&#8217;s
	outer life. This, indeed, is in places freely drawn upon, as
	the outer lives of Dickens, George Eliot, Tolstoi are drawn
	upon in &#8220;David Copperfield,&#8221; &#8220;The Mill on the Floss,&#8221;
	&#8220;Anna Karénina.&#8221; Entepfuhl is only another name for
	Ecclefechan; the picture of little Diogenes eating his supper
	out-of-doors on fine summer evenings, and meanwhile watching
	the sun sink behind the western hills, is clearly a
	loving transcript from memory; even the idyllic episode of
	Blumine may be safely traced back to a romance of
	Carlyle&#8217;s youth. But to investigate the connection at these
	and other points between the mere externals of the two
	careers is a matter of little more than curious interest. It
	is because it incorporates and reproduces so much of
	Carlyle&#8217;s inner history that the story of Teufelsdröckh is
	really important. Spiritually considered, the whole narrative
	is, in fact, a &#8220;symbolic myth,&#8221; in which the writer&#8217;s personal
	trials and conflicts are depicted with little change save
	in setting and accessories. Like Teufelsdröckh, Carlyle
	while still a young man had broken away from the old
	religious creed in which he had been bred; like Teufelsdröckh,
	he had thereupon passed into the &#8220;howling desert
	of infidelity;&#8221; like Teufelsdröckh, he had known all the
	agonies and anguish of a long period of blank scepticism
	and insurgent despair, during which, turn whither he
	would, life responded with nothing but negations to every
	question and appeal. And as to Teufelsdröckh in the Rue
	Saint-Thomas de l&#8217;Enfer in Paris, so to Carlyle in Leith
	<span class="pagenum"><a id="pagex" name="pagex"></a>x</span>Walk, Edinburgh, there had come a moment of sudden and
	marvellous illumination, a mystical crisis from which he
	had emerged a different man. The parallelism is so obvious
	and so close as to leave no room for doubt that the story
	of Teufelsdröckh is substantially a piece of spiritual autobiography.</p>

	<p>This admitted, the question arises whether Carlyle had
	any purpose, beyond that of self-expression, in thus utilising
	his own experiences for the human setting of his philosophy.
	It seems evident that he had. As he conceived them, these
	experiences possessed far more than a merely personal
	interest and meaning. He wrote of himself because he saw
	in himself a type of his restless and much-troubled epoch;
	because he knew that in a broad sense his history was the
	history of thousands of other young men in the generation
	to which he belonged. The age which followed upon the
	vast upheaval of the Revolution was one of widespread
	turmoil and perplexity. Men felt themselves to be wandering
	aimlessly &#8220;between two worlds, one dead, the other
	powerless to be born.&#8221; The old order had collapsed in
	shapeless ruin; but the promised Utopia had not been realised
	to take its place. In many directions the forces of
	reaction were at work. Religion, striving to maintain itself
	upon the dogmatic creeds of the past, was rapidly petrifying
	into a mere &#8220;dead Letter of Religion,&#8221; from which all the
	living spirit had fled; and those who could not nourish themselves
	on hearsay and inherited formula knew not where to
	look for the renewal of faith and hope. The generous
	ardour and the splendid humanitarian enthusiasms which
	had been stirred by the opening phases of the revolutionary
	movement, had now ebbed away; revulsion had followed,
	and with it the mood of disillusion and despair. The spirit
	of doubt and denial was felt as a paralysing power in every
	department of life and thought, and the shadow of unbelief
	lay heavy on many hearts.</p>

	<p>It was for the men of this &#8220;sad time&#8221; that Carlyle wrote
	Teufelsdröckh&#8217;s story; and he wrote it not merely to depict
	the far-reaching consequences of their pessimism but also
	to make plain to them their true path out of it. He desired
	to exhibit to his age the real nature of the strange malady
	from which it was suffering in order that he might thereupon
	proclaim the remedy.</p>

	<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="pagexi" name="pagexi"></a>xi</span>What, then, is the moral significance of Carlyle&#8217;s
	&#8220;symbolic myth&#8221;? What are the supreme lessons which
	he uses it to convey?</p>

	<p>We must begin by understanding his diagnosis. For
	him, all the evils of the time could ultimately be traced
	back to their common source in what may be briefly
	described as its want of real religion. Of churches and
	creeds there were plenty; of living faith little or nothing
	was left. Men had lost all vital sense of God in the world;
	and because of this, they had taken up a fatally wrong
	attitude to life. They looked at it wholly from the
	mechanical point of view, and judged it by merely utilitarian
	standards. The &#8220;body-politic&#8221; was no longer
	inspired by any &#8220;soul-politic.&#8221; Men, individually and in
	the mass, cared only for material prosperity, sought only
	outward success, made the pursuit of happiness the end and
	aim of their being. The divine meaning of virtue, the
	infinite nature of duty, had been forgotten, and morality
	had been turned into a sort of ledger-philosophy, based upon
	calculations of profit and loss.</p>

	<p>It was thus that Carlyle read the signs of the times. In
	such circumstances what was needed? Nothing less than
	a spiritual rebirth. Men must abandon their wrong attitude
	to life, and take up the right attitude. Everything
	hinged on that. And that they might take up this right
	attitude it was necessary first that they should be convinced
	of life&#8217;s essential spirituality, and cease in consequence to
	seek its meaning and test its value on the plane of merely
	material things.</p>

	<p>Carlyle thus throws passionate emphasis upon religion as
	the only saving power. But it must be noted that he does
	not suggest a return to any of the dogmatic creeds of the
	past. Though once the expression of a living faith, these
	were now for him mere lifeless formulas. Nor has he any
	new dogmatic creed to offer in their place. That mystical
	crisis which had broken the spell of the Everlasting No was
	in a strict sense&#8212;he uses the word himself&#8212;a conversion.
	But it was not a conversion in the theological sense, for it
	did not involve the acceptance of any specific articles of faith.
	It was simply a complete change of front; the protest of his
	whole nature, in a suddenly aroused mood of indignation
	and defiance, against the &#8220;spirit which denies;&#8221; the assertion
	<span class="pagenum"><a id="pagexii" name="pagexii"></a>xii</span>of his manhood against the cowardice which had so long
	kept him trembling and whimpering before the facts of
	existence. But from that change of front came presently
	the vivid apprehension of certain great truths which his
	former mood had thus far concealed from him; and in these
	truths he found the secret of that right attitude to life in
	the discovery of which lay men&#8217;s only hope of salvation from
	the unrest and melancholy of their time.</p>

	<p>From this point of view the burden of Carlyle&#8217;s message
	to his generation will be readily understood. Men were
	going wrong because they started with the thought of self,
	and made satisfaction of self the law of their lives; because,
	in consequence, they regarded happiness as the chief object
	of pursuit and the one thing worth striving for; because,
	under the influence of the current rationalism, they tried to
	escape from their spiritual perplexities through logic and
	speculation. They had, therefore, to set themselves right
	upon all these matters. They had to learn that not self-satisfaction
	but self-renunciation is the key to life and its
	true law; that we have no prescriptive claim to happiness
	and no business to quarrel with the universe if it withholds
	it from us; that the way out of pessimism lies, not through
	reason, but through honest work, steady adherence to the
	simple duty which each day brings, fidelity to the right as
	we know it. Such, in broad statement, is the substance of
	Carlyle&#8217;s religious convictions and moral teaching. Like
	Kant he takes his stand on the principles of ethical idealism.
	God is to be sought, not through speculation, or syllogism,
	or the learning of the schools, but through the moral nature.
	It is the soul in action that alone finds God. And the finding
	of God means, not happiness as the world conceives it,
	but blessedness, or the inward peace which passes understanding.</p>

	<p>The connection between the transfigured autobiography
	which serves to introduce the directly didactic element of the
	book and that element itself, will now be clear. Stripped
	of its whimsicalities of phraseology and its humorous extravagances,
	Carlyle&#8217;s philosophy stands revealed as essentially
	idealistic in character. Spirit is the only reality.
	Visible things are but the manifestations, emblems, or clothings
	of spirit. The material universe itself is only the vesture
	or symbol of God; man is a spirit, though he wears the
	<span class="pagenum"><a id="pagexiii" name="pagexiii"></a>xiii</span>wrappings of the flesh; and in everything that man creates
	for himself he merely attempts to give body or expression to
	thought. The science of Carlyle&#8217;s time was busy proclaiming
	that, since the universe is governed by natural laws,
	miracles are impossible and the supernatural is a myth.
	Carlyle replies that the natural laws are themselves only the
	manifestation of Spiritual Force, and that thus miracle is
	everywhere and all nature supernatural. We, who are the
	creatures of time and space, can indeed apprehend the
	Absolute only when He weaves about Him the visible
	garments of time and space. Thus God reveals Himself to
	sense through symbols. But it is as we regard these symbols
	in one or other of two possible ways that we class ourselves
	with the foolish man or with the wise. The foolish man
	sees only the symbol, thinks it exists for itself, takes it for
	the ultimate fact, and therefore rests in it. The wise man
	sees the symbol, knows that it is only a symbol, and penetrates
	into it for the ultimate fact or spiritual reality which
	it symbolises.</p>

	<p>Remote as such a doctrine may at first sight seem to be
	from the questions with which men are commonly concerned,
	it has none the less many important practical bearings.
	Since &#8220;all Forms whereby Spirit manifests itself to sense,
	whether outwardly or in the imagination, are Clothes,&#8221;
	civilisation and everything belonging to it&#8212;our languages,
	literatures and arts, our governments, social machinery and
	institutions, our philosophies, creeds and rituals&#8212;are but so
	many vestments woven for itself by the shaping spirit of
	man. Indispensable these vestments are; for without them
	society would collapse in anarchy, and humanity sink to the
	level of the brute. Yet here again we must emphasise the
	difference, already noted, between the foolish man and the
	wise. The foolish man once more assumes that the vestments
	exist for themselves, as ultimate facts, and that they
	have a value of their own. He, therefore, confuses the life
	with its clothing; is even willing to sacrifice the life for the
	sake of the clothing. The wise man, while he, too, recognises
	the necessity of the vestments, and indeed insists upon
	it, knows that they have no independent importance, that
	they derive all their potency and value from the inner reality
	which they were fashioned to represent and embody, but
	which they often misrepresent and obscure. He therefore
	<span class="pagenum"><a id="pagexiv" name="pagexiv"></a>xiv</span>never confuses the life with the clothing, and well understands
	how often the clothing has to be sacrificed for the
	sake of the life. Thus, while the utility of clothes has to
	be recognised to the full, it is still of the essence of wisdom
	to press hard upon the vital distinction between the outer
	wrappings of man&#8217;s life and that inner reality which they
	more or less adequately enfold.</p>

	<p>The use which Carlyle makes of this doctrine in his interpretation
	of the religious history of the world and of
	the crisis in thought of his own day, will be anticipated.
	All dogmas, forms and ceremonials, he teaches, are but
	religious vestments&#8212;symbols expressing man&#8217;s deepest sense
	of the divine mystery of the universe and the hunger and
	thirst of his soul for God. It is in response to the imperative
	necessities of his nature that he moulds for himself
	these outward emblems of his ideas and aspirations.
	Yet they are only emblems; and since, like all other human
	things, they partake of the ignorance and weakness of the
	times in which they were framed, it is inevitable that with
	the growth of knowledge and the expansion of thought they
	must presently be outgrown. When this happens, there
	follows what Carlyle calls the &#8220;superannuation of symbols.&#8221;
	Men wake to the fact that the creeds and formulas which
	have come down to them from the past are no longer living
	for them, no longer what they need for the embodiment of
	their spiritual life. Two mistakes are now possible, and
	these are, indeed, commonly made together. On the one
	hand, men may try to ignore the growth of knowledge and
	the expansion of thought, and to cling to the outgrown
	symbols as things having in themselves some mysterious
	sanctity and power. On the other hand, they may recklessly
	endeavour to cast aside the reality symbolised along
	with the discredited symbol itself. Given such a condition
	of things, and we shall find religion degenerating into
	formalism and the worship of the dead letter, and, side by
	side with this, the impatient rejection of all religion, and the
	spread of a crude and debasing materialism. Religious
	symbols, then, must be renewed. But their renewal can
	come only from within. Form, to have any real value,
	must grow out of life and be fed by it.</p>

	<p>The revolutionary quality in the philosophy of &#8220;Sartor
	Resartus&#8221; cannot, of course, be overlooked. Everything
	<span class="pagenum"><a id="pagexv" name="pagexv"></a>xv</span>that man has woven for himself must in time become merely
	&#8220;old clothes&#8221;; the work of his thought, like that of his
	hands, is perishable; his very highest symbols have no
	permanence or finality. Carlyle cuts down to the essential
	reality beneath all shows and forms and emblems: witness
	his amazing vision of a naked House of Lords. Under his
	penetrating gaze the &#8220;earthly hulls and garnitures&#8221; of
	existence melt away. Men&#8217;s habit is to rest in symbols.
	But to rest in symbols is fatal, since they are at best but
	the &#8220;adventitious wrappages&#8221; of life. Clothes &#8220;have
	made men of us&#8221;&#8212;true; but now, so great has their influence
	become that &#8220;they are threatening to make clothes-screens
	of us.&#8221; Hence &#8220;the beginning of all wisdom is
	to look fixedly on clothes &#8230; till they become transparent.&#8221;
	The logical tendency of such teaching may seem to be
	towards utter nihilism. But that tendency is checked and
	qualified by the strong conservative element which is everywhere
	prominent in Carlyle&#8217;s thought. Upon the absolute
	need of &#8220;clothes&#8221; the stress is again and again thrown.
	They &#8220;have made men of us.&#8221; By symbols alone man
	lives and works. By symbols alone can he make life and
	work effective. Thus even the world&#8217;s &#8220;old clothes&#8221;&#8212;its
	discarded forms and creeds&#8212;should be treated with the
	reverence due to whatever has once played a part in human
	development. Thus, moreover, we must be on our guard
	against the impetuosity of the revolutionary spirit and all
	rash rupture with the past. To cast old clothes aside before
	new clothes are ready&#8212;this does not mean progress, but
	sansculottism, or a lapse into nakedness and anarchy.</p>

	<p class="post_thoughtbreak">The lectures &#8220;On Heroes and Hero-Worship,&#8221; here
	printed with &#8220;Sartor Resartus,&#8221; contain little more than
	an amplification, through a series of brilliant character-studies,
	of those fundamental ideas of history which had
	already figured among Teufelsdröckh&#8217;s social speculations.
	Simple in statement and clear in doctrine, this second work
	needs no formal introduction. It may, however, be of
	service just to indicate one or two points at which, apart
	from its set theses, it expresses or implies certain underlying
	principles of all Carlyle&#8217;s thought.</p>

	<p>In the first place, his philosophy of history rests entirely
	on &#8220;the great man theory.&#8221; &#8220;Universal History, the
	<span class="pagenum"><a id="pagexvi" name="pagexvi"></a>xvi</span>history of what man has accomplished in the world,&#8221; is for
	him &#8220;at bottom the History of the Great Men who have
	worked here.&#8221; This conception, of course, brings him into
	sharp conflict with that scientific view of history which was
	already gaining ground when &#8220;Heroes and Hero-Worship&#8221;
	was written, and which since then has become even more
	popular under the powerful influence of the modern doctrine
	of evolution. A scientific historian, like Buckle or Taine,
	seeks to explain all changes in thought, all movements in
	politics and society, in terms of general laws; his habit is,
	therefore, to subordinate, if not quite to eliminate, the individual;
	the greatest man is treated as in a large measure
	the product and expression of the &#8220;spirit of the time.&#8221; For
	Carlyle, individuality is everything. While, as he is bound
	to admit, &#8220;no one works save under conditions,&#8221; external
	circumstances and influences count little. The Great Man
	is supreme. He is not the creature of his age, but its
	creator; not its servant, but its master. &#8220;The History of
	the World is but the Biography of Great Men.&#8221;</p>

	<p>Anti-scientific in his reading of history, Carlyle is also
	anti-democratic in the practical lessons he deduces from it.
	He teaches that our right relations with the Hero are
	discipular relations; that we should honestly acknowledge
	his superiority, look up to him, reverence him. Thus on
	the personal side he challenges that tendency to &#8220;level
	down&#8221; which he believed to be one alarming result of the
	fast-spreading spirit of the new democracy. But more than
	this. He insists that the one hope for our distracted world
	of to-day lies in the strength and wisdom of the few, not in
	the organised unwisdom of the many. The masses of the
	people can never be safely trusted to solve for themselves the
	intricate problems of their own welfare. They need to be
	guided, disciplined, at times even driven, by those great
	leaders of men, who see more deeply than they see into the
	reality of things, and know much better than they can ever
	know what is good for them, and how that good is to be
	attained. Political machinery, in which the modern world
	had come to put so much faith, is only another delusion
	of a mechanical age. The burden of history is for him
	always the need of the Able Man. &#8220;I say, Find me the
	true <i>Könning</i>, King, Able Man, and he <em>has</em> a divine right
	over me.&#8221; Carlyle thus throws down the gauntlet at once
	<span class="pagenum"><a id="pagexvii" name="pagexvii"></a>xvii</span>to the scientific and to the democratic movements of his
	time. His pronounced antagonism to the modern spirit in
	these two most important manifestations must be kept
	steadily in mind in our study of him.</p>

	<p>Finally, we have to remember that in the whole tone and
	temper of his teaching Carlyle is fundamentally the Puritan.
	The dogmas of Puritanism he had indeed outgrown; but he
	never outgrew its ethics. His thought was dominated and
	pervaded to the end, as Froude rightly says, by the spirit
	of the creed he had dismissed. By reference to this one
	fact we may account for much of his strength, and also
	for most of his limitations in outlook and sympathy. Those
	limitations the reader will not fail to notice for himself.
	But whatever allowance has to be made for them, the
	strength remains. It is, perhaps, the secret of Carlyle&#8217;s
	imperishable greatness as a stimulating and uplifting power
	that, beyond any other modern writer, he makes us feel
	with him the supreme claims of the moral life, the meaning
	of our own responsibilities, the essential spirituality of
	things, the indestructible reality of religion. If he had
	thus a special message for his own generation, that message
	has surely not lost any of its value for ours. &#8220;Put Carlyle
	in your pocket,&#8221; says Dr. Hal to Paul Kelver on his starting
	out in life. &#8220;He is not all the voices, but he is the
	best maker of men I know.&#8221; And as a maker of men,
	Carlyle&#8217;s appeal to us is as great as ever.</p>

	<p class="author_sign">William Henry Hudson.</p>


	<div class="bibliography">
		<p><i>Life of Schiller</i> (<i>Lond. Mag.</i>, 1823-4), 1825, 1845. (Supplement
		published in the People&#8217;s Edition, 1873). <i>Wilhelm Meister Apprenticeship</i>,
		1824. <i>Elements of Geometry and Trigonometry</i> (from the French
		of Legendre), 1824. <i>German Romance</i>, 1827. <i>Sartor Resartus</i>
		(<i>Fraser&#8217;s Mag.</i>, 1833-4), 1835 (Boston), 1838. <i>French Revolution</i>,
		1837, 1839. <i>Critical and Miscellaneous Essays</i>, 1839, 1840, 1847,
		1857. (In these were reprinted Articles from <i>Edinburgh Review</i>,
		<i>Foreign Review</i>, <i>Foreign Quarterly Review</i>, <i>Fraser&#8217;s Magazine</i>,
		<i>Westminster Review</i>, <i>New Monthly Magazine</i>, <i>London and Westminster
		Review</i>, <i>Keepsake Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries of
		Scotland</i>, <i>Times</i>). <i>Chartism</i>, 1840. <i>Heroes, Hero-worship, and the
		Heroic in History</i>, 1841. <i>Past and Present</i>, 1843. <i>Oliver Cromwell&#8217;s
		Letters and Speeches: with Elucidations</i>, 1845. <i>Thirty-five Unpublished
		Letters of Oliver Cromwell</i>, 1847 (Fraser). <i>Original Discourses
		on the Negro Question</i> (Fraser, 1849), 1853. <i>Latter-day Pamphlets</i>,
		1850. <i>Life of John Sterling</i>, 1851. <i>History of Friedrich II. of
		Prussia</i>, 1858-65. <i>Inaugural Address at Edinburgh</i>, 1866. <i>Shooting
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="pagexviii" name="pagexviii"></a>xviii</span>Niagara: and After?</i> 1867 (from &#8220;Macmillan&#8221;). <i>The Early Kings
		of Norway; also an Essay on the Portraits of John Knox</i>, 1875.</p>

		<p>There were also contributions to Brewster&#8217;s <i>Edinburgh Encyclopædia</i>,
		vols. xiv., xv., and xvi.; to <i>New Edinburgh Review</i>, 1821, 1822;
		<i>Fraser&#8217;s Magazine</i>, 1830, 1831; <i>The Times</i>, 19 June, 1844
		(&#8220;Mazzini&#8221;); 28 November, 1876; 5 May, 1877; <i>Examiner</i>, 1848;
		<i>Spectator</i>, 1848.</p>

		<p>First Collected Edition of Works, 1857-58 (16 vols.).</p>

		<p><i>Reminiscences</i>, ed. by Froude in 1881, but superseded by C. E.
		Norton&#8217;s edition of 1887. Norton has also edited two volumes of
		<i>Letters</i> (1888), and Carlyle&#8217;s correspondence with Emerson (1883) and
		with Goethe (1887). Other volumes of correspondence are <i>New Letters</i>
		(1904), <i>Carlyle Intime</i> (1907), <i>Love Letters</i> (1909), <i>Letters to Mill,
		Sterling, and Browning</i> (1923), all ed. by Alexander Carlyle. See also
		<i>Last Words of Carlyle</i>, 1892.</p>

		<p>The fullest <i>Life</i> is that by D. A. Wilson. The first of six volumes
		appeared in 1923, and by 1934 only one remained to be published.</p>
	</div>

</div>
<div id="contents" class="section">
<!-- <span class="pagenum"><a id="pagexix" name="pagexix"></a>xix</span> -->
	<h2 class="section_title">CONTENTS</h2>
	<h3 class="section_head">SARTOR RESARTUS</h3>
	<p class="toc_section_title"><a href="#book_first">BOOK I</a></p>
	<p class="toc_header">CHAP. <span class="toc_pagenum">PAGE</span></p>
	<ol class="chapter_list">
		<li><a href="#book_1_chapter_1" class="toc_title">Preliminary</a> <a href="#page1" class="toc_pagenum">1</a></li>
		<li><a href="#book_1_chapter_2" class="toc_title">Editorial Difficulties</a> <a href="#page5" class="toc_pagenum">5</a></li>
		<li><a href="#book_1_chapter_3" class="toc_title">Reminiscences</a> <a href="#page9" class="toc_pagenum">9</a></li>
		<li><a href="#book_1_chapter_4" class="toc_title">Characteristics</a> <a href="#page20" class="toc_pagenum">20</a></li>
		<li><a href="#book_1_chapter_5" class="toc_title">The World in Clothes</a> <a href="#page25" class="toc_pagenum">25</a></li>
		<li><a href="#book_1_chapter_6" class="toc_title">Aprons</a> <a href="#page31" class="toc_pagenum">31</a></li>
		<li><a href="#book_1_chapter_7" class="toc_title">Miscellaneous-historical</a> <a href="#page34" class="toc_pagenum">34</a></li>
		<li><a href="#book_1_chapter_8" class="toc_title">The World out of Clothes</a> <a href="#page37" class="toc_pagenum">37</a></li>
		<li><a href="#book_1_chapter_9" class="toc_title">Adamitism</a> <a href="#page43" class="toc_pagenum">43</a></li>
		<li><a href="#book_1_chapter_10" class="toc_title">Pure Reason</a> <a href="#page47" class="toc_pagenum">47</a></li>
		<li><a href="#book_1_chapter_11" class="toc_title">Prospective</a> <a href="#page52" class="toc_pagenum">52</a></li>
	</ol>

	<p class="toc_section_title"><a href="#book_second">BOOK II</a></p>
	<ol class="chapter_list">
		<li><a href="#book_2_chapter_1" class="toc_title">Genesis</a> <a href="#page61" class="toc_pagenum">61</a></li>
		<li><a href="#book_2_chapter_2" class="toc_title">Idyllic</a> <a href="#page68" class="toc_pagenum">68</a></li>
		<li><a href="#book_2_chapter_3" class="toc_title">Pedagogy</a> <a href="#page76" class="toc_pagenum">76</a></li>
		<li><a href="#book_2_chapter_4" class="toc_title">Getting under Way</a> <a href="#page90" class="toc_pagenum">90</a></li>
		<li><a href="#book_2_chapter_5" class="toc_title">Romance</a> <a href="#page101" class="toc_pagenum">101</a></li>
		<li><a href="#book_2_chapter_6" class="toc_title">Sorrows of Teufelsdröckh</a> <a href="#page112" class="toc_pagenum">112</a></li>
		<li><a href="#book_2_chapter_7" class="toc_title">The Everlasting No</a> <a href="#page121" class="toc_pagenum">121</a></li>
		<li><a href="#book_2_chapter_8" class="toc_title">Centre of Indifference</a> <a href="#page128" class="toc_pagenum">128</a></li>
		<li><a href="#book_2_chapter_9" class="toc_title">The Everlasting Yea</a> <a href="#page138" class="toc_pagenum">138</a></li>
		<li><a href="#book_2_chapter_10" class="toc_title">Pause</a> <a href="#page149" class="toc_pagenum">149</a></li>
	</ol>

	<p class="toc_section_title"><a href="#book_third">BOOK III</a></p>
	<ol class="chapter_list">
		<li><a href="#book_3_chapter_1" class="toc_title">Incident in Modern History</a> <a href="#page156" class="toc_pagenum">156</a></li>
		<li><a href="#book_3_chapter_2" class="toc_title">Church-Clothes</a> <a href="#page161" class="toc_pagenum">161</a></li>
		<li><a href="#book_3_chapter_3" class="toc_title">Symbols</a> <a href="#page163" class="toc_pagenum">163</a></li>
		<li><a href="#book_3_chapter_4" class="toc_title">Helotage</a> <a href="#page170" class="toc_pagenum">170</a></li>
		<li><a href="#book_3_chapter_5" class="toc_title">The Phœnix</a> <a href="#page174" class="toc_pagenum">174</a></li>
		<li><!-- <span class="pagenum"><a id="pagexx" name="pagexx"></a>xx</span> --><a href="#book_3_chapter_6" class="toc_title">Old Clothes</a> <a href="#page179" class="toc_pagenum">179</a></li>
		<li><a href="#book_3_chapter_7" class="toc_title">Organic Filaments</a> <a href="#page183" class="toc_pagenum">183</a></li>
		<li><a href="#book_3_chapter_8" class="toc_title">Natural Supernaturalism</a> <a href="#page191" class="toc_pagenum">191</a></li>
		<li><a href="#book_3_chapter_9" class="toc_title">Circumspective</a> <a href="#page201" class="toc_pagenum">201</a></li>
		<li><a href="#book_3_chapter_10" class="toc_title">The Dandiacal Body</a> <a href="#page204" class="toc_pagenum">204</a></li>
		<li><a href="#book_3_chapter_11" class="toc_title">Tailors</a> <a href="#page216" class="toc_pagenum">216</a></li>
		<li><a href="#book_3_chapter_12" class="toc_title">Farewell</a> <a href="#page219" class="toc_pagenum">219</a></li>
	</ol>

	<ul>
		<li><a href="#appendix" class="toc_title">Appendix&#8212;Testimonies of Authors</a> <a href="#page225" class="toc_pagenum">225</a></li>
		<li><a href="#summary" class="toc_title">Summary</a> <a href="#page231" class="toc_pagenum">231</a></li>
	</ul>

	<h3 class="section_head"><a href="#onheroes">ON HEROES, HERO-WORSHIP, AND THE HEROIC IN HISTORY</a></h3>
	<p class="toc_section_title"><a href="#lecturei">LECTURE I</a></p>
		<p><span class="toc_title">The Hero as Divinity.</span> Odin. Paganism: Scandinavian Mythology <a href="#page239" class="toc_pagenum">239</a></p>
	<p class="toc_section_title"><a href="#lectureii">LECTURE II</a></p>
		<p><span class="toc_title">The Hero as Prophet.</span> Mahomet: Islam <a href="#page277" class="toc_pagenum">277</a></p>
	<p class="toc_section_title"><a href="#lectureiii">LECTURE III</a></p>
		<p><span class="toc_title">The Hero as Poet.</span> Dante; Shakspeare <a href="#page311" class="toc_pagenum">311</a></p>
	<p class="toc_section_title"><a href="#lectureiv">LECTURE IV</a></p>
		<p><span class="toc_title">The Hero as Priest.</span> Luther; Reformation: Knox; Puritanism <a href="#page346" class="toc_pagenum">346</a></p>
	<p class="toc_section_title"><a href="#lecturev">LECTURE V</a></p>
		<p><span class="toc_title">The Hero as Man of Letters.</span> Johnson, Rousseau, Burns <a href="#page383" class="toc_pagenum">383</a></p>
	<p class="toc_section_title"><a href="#lecturevi">LECTURE VI</a></p>
		<p><span class="toc_title">The Hero as King.</span> Cromwell, Napoleon: Modern Revolutionism <a href="#page422" class="toc_pagenum">422</a></p>

	<p class="toc_index_title"><a href="#index" class="toc_title">Index</a> <a href="#page469" class="toc_pagenum">469</a></p>

</div>
<div id="sartorresartus" class="work">
	<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page1" name="page1"></a>1</span></p>
	<h1 class="work_title">SARTOR RESARTUS</h1>
	<div id="book_first" class="book">
		<h2 class="book_title">BOOK FIRST</h2>
		<div id="book_1_chapter_1" class="chapter">
			<p class="chapter_head">CHAPTER I</p>

			<h3 class="chapter_title">PRELIMINARY</h3>

			<p><span class="first_word">Considering</span> our present advanced state of culture,
			and how the Torch of Science has now been brandished
			and borne about, with more or less effect, for five-thousand
			years and upwards; how, in these times especially,
			not only the Torch still burns, and perhaps more fiercely
			than ever, but innumerable Rush-lights, and Sulphur-matches,
			kindled thereat, are also glancing in every
			direction, so that not the smallest cranny or doghole in
			Nature or Art can remain unilluminated,&#8212;it might strike
			the reflective mind with some surprise that hitherto
			little or nothing of a fundamental character, whether
			in the way of Philosophy or History, has been written
			on the subject of Clothes.</p>

			<p>Our Theory of Gravitation is as good as perfect:
			Lagrange, it is well known, has proved that the Planetary
			System, on this scheme, will endure forever; Laplace,
			still more cunningly, even guesses that it could
			not have been made on any other scheme. Whereby,
			at least, our nautical Logbooks can be better kept; and
			water-transport of all kinds has grown more commodious.
			Of Geology and Geognosy we know enough:
			what with the labours of our Werners and Huttons,
			what with the ardent genius of their disciples, it has
			come about that now, to many a Royal Society, the
			Creation of a World is little more mysterious than the
			cooking of a dumpling; concerning which last, indeed,
			there have been minds to whom the question, <i>How the
			apples were got in</i>, presented difficulties. Why mention
			our disquisitions on the Social Contract, on the Standard
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page2" name="page2"></a>2</span>of Taste, on the Migrations of the Herring? Then,
			have we not a Doctrine of Rent, a Theory of Value;
			Philosophies of Language, of History, of Pottery, of
			Apparitions, of Intoxicating Liquors? Man&#8217;s whole life
			and environment have been laid open and elucidated;
			scarcely a fragment or fibre of his Soul, Body, and Possessions,
			but has been probed, dissected, distilled,
			desiccated, and scientifically decomposed: our spiritual
			Faculties, of which it appears there are not a few, have
			their Stewarts, Cousins, Royer Collards: every cellular,
			vascular, muscular Tissue glories in its Lawrences,
			Majendies, Bichâts.</p>

			<p>How, then, comes it, may the reflective mind repeat,
			that the grand Tissue of all Tissues, the only real
			Tissue, should have been quite overlooked by Science,&#8212;the
			vestural Tissue, namely, of woollen or other cloth;
			which Man&#8217;s Soul wears as its outmost wrappage and
			overall; wherein his whole other Tissues are included
			and screened, his whole Faculties work, his whole Self
			lives, moves, and has its being? For if, now and then,
			some straggling, broken-winged thinker has cast an
			owl&#8217;s-glance into this obscure region, the most have
			soared over it altogether heedless; regarding Clothes
			as a property, not an accident, as quite natural and
			spontaneous, like the leaves of trees, like the plumage
			of birds. In all speculations they have tacitly figured
			man as a <em>Clothed Animal</em>; whereas he is by nature a
			<em>Naked Animal</em>; and only in certain circumstances, by
			purpose and device, masks himself in Clothes. Shakespeare
			says, we are creatures that look before and after:
			the more surprising that we do not look round a little,
			and see what is passing under our very eyes.</p>

			<p>But here, as in so many other cases, Germany, learned,
			indefatigable, deep-thinking Germany comes to our aid.
			It is, after all, a blessing that, in these revolutionary
			times, there should be one country where abstract
			Thought can still take shelter; that while the din and
			frenzy of Catholic Emancipations, and Rotten Boroughs,
			and Revolts of Paris, deafen every French and every
			English ear, the German can stand peaceful on his
			scientific watch-tower; and, to the raging, struggling
			multitude here and elsewhere, solemnly, from hour to
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page3" name="page3"></a>3</span>hour, with preparatory blast of cowhorn, emit his <i>Höret
			ihr Herren und lasset&#8217;s Euch sagen</i>; in other words,
			tell the Universe, which so often forgets that fact, what
			o&#8217;clock it really is. Not unfrequently the Germans have
			been blamed for an unprofitable diligence; as if they
			struck into devious courses, where nothing was to be
			had but the toil of a rough journey; as if, forsaking
			the gold-mines of finance and that political slaughter of
			fat oxen whereby a man himself grows fat, they were
			apt to run goose-hunting into regions of bilberries and
			crowberries, and be swallowed up at last in remote
			peat-bogs. Of that unwise science, which, as our
			Humorist expresses it,&#8212;</p>

			<div class="poem">
			    <div class="stanza">
			        <p class="i6">&#8216;By geometric scale</p>
			        <p>Doth take the size of pots of ale;&#8217;</p>
			    </div>
			</div>

			<p class="continued">still more, of that altogether misdirected industry, which
			is seen vigorously thrashing mere straw, there can
			nothing defensive be said. In so far as the Germans
			are chargeable with such, let them take the consequence.
			Nevertheless, be it remarked, that even a Russian steppe
			has tumuli and gold ornaments; also many a scene
			that looks desert and rock-bound from the distance, will
			unfold itself, when visited, into rare valleys. Nay, in
			any case, would Criticism erect not only finger-posts and
			turnpikes, but spiked gates and impassable barriers,
			for the mind of man? It is written, &#8216;Many shall run
			to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased.&#8217; Surely
			the plain rule is, Let each considerate person have his
			way, and see what it will lead to. For not this man
			and that man, but all men make up mankind, and their
			united tasks the task of mankind. How often have we
			seen some such adventurous, and perhaps much-censured
			wanderer light on some out-lying, neglected, yet vitally-momentous
			province; the hidden treasures of which
			he first discovered, and kept proclaiming till the general
			eye and effort were directed thither, and the conquest
			was completed;&#8212;thereby, in these his seemingly so aimless
			rambles, planting new standards, founding new
			habitable colonies, in the immeasurable circumambient
			realm of Nothingness and Night! Wise man was he
			who counselled that Speculation should have free course,
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page4" name="page4"></a>4</span>and look fearlessly towards all the thirty-two points of
			the compass, whithersoever and howsoever it listed.</p>

			<p>Perhaps it is proof of the stunted condition in which
			pure Science, especially pure moral Science, languishes
			among us English; and how our mercantile greatness,
			and invaluable Constitution, impressing a political or
			other immediately practical tendency on all English
			culture and endeavour, cramps the free flight of Thought,&#8212;that
			this, not Philosophy of Clothes, but recognition
			even that we have no such Philosophy, stands here for
			the first time published in our language. What English
			intellect could have chosen such a topic, or by chance
			stumbled on it? But for that same unshackled, and
			even sequestered condition of the German Learned,
			which permits and induces them to fish in all manner
			of waters, with all manner of nets, it seems probable
			enough, this abstruse Inquiry might, in spite of the
			results it leads to, have continued dormant for indefinite
			periods. The Editor of these sheets, though otherwise
			boasting himself a man of confirmed speculative habits,
			and perhaps discursive enough, is free to confess, that
			never, till these last months, did the above very plain
			considerations, on our total want of a Philosophy of
			Clothes, occur to him; and then, by quite foreign suggestion.
			By the arrival, namely, of a new Book from
			Professor Teufelsdröckh of Weissnichtwo; treating expressly
			of this subject, and in a style which, whether
			understood or not, could not even by the blindest be
			overlooked. In the present Editor&#8217;s way of thought,
			this remarkable Treatise, with its Doctrines, whether as
			judicially acceded to, or judicially denied, has not
			remained without effect.</p>

			<p>&#8216;<i>Die Kleider, ihr Werden und Wirken</i> (Clothes, their
			Origin and Influence): <i>von Diog. Teufelsdröckh,
			J.U.D. etc.</i> <i>Stillschweigen und Co<sup>gnie</sup></i>. <i>Weissnichtwo</i>,
			1831.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Here,&#8217; says the <i>Weissnichtwo&#8217;sche Anzeiger</i>,
			&#8216;comes a Volume of that extensive, close-printed,
			close-meditated sort, which, be it spoken with pride, is
			seen only in Germany, perhaps only in Weissnichtwo.
			Issuing from the hitherto irreproachable Firm of Stillschweigen
			and Company, with every external furtherance,
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page5" name="page5"></a>5</span>it is of such internal quality as to set Neglect at
			defiance.&#8217; * * * * &#8216;A work,&#8217; concludes the wellnigh
			enthusiastic Reviewer, &#8216;interesting alike to the antiquary,
			the historian, and the philosophic thinker; a
			masterpiece of boldness, lynx-eyed acuteness, and
			rugged independent Germanism and Philanthropy (<i>derber
			Kerndeutschheit und Menschenliebe</i>); which will not,
			assuredly, pass current without opposition in high
			places; but must and will exalt the almost new name
			of Teufelsdröckh to the first ranks of Philosophy, in our
			German Temple of Honour.&#8217;</p>

			<p>Mindful of old friendship, the distinguished Professor,
			in this the first blaze of his fame, which however does
			not dazzle him, sends hither a Presentation-copy of his
			Book; with compliments and encomiums which modesty
			forbids the present Editor to rehearse; yet without
			indicated wish or hope of any kind, except what may be
			implied in the concluding phrase: <i>Möchte es</i> (this
			remarkable Treatise) <i>auch im Brittischen Boden
			gedeihen!</i></p>
		</div>
		<div id="book_1_chapter_2" class="chapter">
			<p class="chapter_head">CHAPTER II</p>

			<h3 class="chapter_title">EDITORIAL DIFFICULTIES</h3>

			<p><span class="first_word">If</span> for a speculative man, &#8216;whose seedfield,&#8217; in the
			sublime words of the Poet, &#8216;is Time,&#8217; no conquest
			is important but that of new ideas, then might the
			arrival of Professor Teufelsdröckh&#8217;s Book be marked
			with chalk in the Editor&#8217;s calendar. It is indeed an
			&#8216;extensive Volume,&#8217; of boundless, almost formless
			contents, a very Sea of Thought; neither calm nor
			clear, if you will; yet wherein the toughest pearl-diver
			may dive to his utmost depth, and return not only with
			sea-wreck but with true orients.</p>

			<p>Directly on the first perusal, almost on the first deliberate
			inspection, it became apparent that here a quite new
			Branch of Philosophy, leading to as yet undescried
			ulterior results, was disclosed; farther, what seemed
			scarcely less interesting, a quite new human Individuality,
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page6" name="page6"></a>6</span>an almost unexampled personal character, that,
			namely, of Professor Teufelsdröckh the Discloser. Of
			both which novelties, as far as might be possible, we
			resolved to master the significance. But as man is
			emphatically a proselytising creature, no sooner was
			such mastery even fairly attempted, than the new question
			arose: How might this acquired good be imparted
			to others, perhaps in equal need thereof: how could
			the Philosophy of Clothes, and the Author of such
			Philosophy, be brought home, in any measure, to the
			business and bosoms of our own English Nation? For
			if new-got gold is said to burn the pockets till it be cast
			forth into circulation, much more may new truth.</p>

			<p>Here, however, difficulties occurred. The first
			thought naturally was to publish Article after Article
			on this remarkable Volume, in such widely-circulating
			Critical Journals as the Editor might stand connected
			with, or by money or love procure access to. But, on
			the other hand, was it not clear that such matter as
			must here be revealed, and treated of, might endanger
			the circulation of any Journal extant? If, indeed, all
			party-divisions in the State could have been abolished,
			Whig, Tory, and Radical, embracing in discrepant
			union; and all the Journals of the Nation could have
			been jumbled into one Journal, and the Philosophy of
			Clothes poured forth in incessant torrents therefrom,
			the attempt had seemed possible. But, alas, what
			vehicle of that sort have we, except <i>Fraser&#8217;s Magazine</i>?
			A vehicle all strewed (figuratively speaking) with the
			maddest Waterloo-Crackers, exploding distractively and
			destructively, wheresoever the mystified passenger
			stands or sits; nay, in any case, understood to be, of
			late years, a vehicle full to overflowing, and inexorably
			shut! Besides, to state the Philosophy of Clothes
			without the Philosopher, the ideas of Teufelsdröckh without
			something of his personality, was it not to insure
			both of entire misapprehension? Now for Biography,
			had it been otherwise admissible, there were no adequate
			documents, no hope of obtaining such, but rather,
			owing to circumstances, a special despair. Thus did
			the Editor see himself, for the while, shut out from all
			public utterance of these extraordinary Doctrines, and
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page7" name="page7"></a>7</span>constrained to revolve them, not without disquietude,
			in the dark depths of his own mind.</p>

			<p>So had it lasted for some months; and now the
			Volume on Clothes, read and again read, was in several
			points becoming lucid and lucent; the personality of
			its Author more and more surprising, but, in spite of
			all that memory and conjecture could do, more and more
			enigmatic; whereby the old disquietude seemed fast
			settling into fixed discontent,&#8212;when altogether unexpectedly
			arrives a Letter from Herr Hofrath Heuschrecke,
			our Professor&#8217;s chief friend and associate in
			Weissnichtwo, with whom we had not previously corresponded.
			The Hofrath, after much quite extraneous
			matter, began dilating largely on the &#8216;agitation and
			attention&#8217; which the Philosophy of Clothes was exciting
			in its own German Republic of Letters; on the deep
			significance and tendency of his Friend&#8217;s Volume; and
			then, at length, with great circumlocution, hinted at
			the practicability of conveying &#8216;some knowledge of it,
			and of him, to England, and through England to the
			distant West&#8217;: a work on Professor Teufelsdröckh
			&#8216;were undoubtedly welcome to the <i>Family</i>, the
			<i>National</i>, or any other of those patriotic <i>Libraries</i>, at
			present the glory of British Literature&#8217;; might work
			revolutions in Thought; and so forth;&#8212;in conclusion,
			intimating not obscurely, that should the present Editor
			feel disposed to undertake a Biography of Teufelsdröckh,
			he, Hofrath Heuschrecke, had it in his power to furnish
			the requisite Documents.</p>

			<p>As in some chemical mixture, that has stood long
			evaporating, but would not crystallise, instantly when the
			wire or other fixed substance is introduced, crystallisation
			commences, and rapidly proceeds till the whole is
			finished, so was it with the Editor&#8217;s mind and this offer
			of Heuschrecke&#8217;s. Form rose out of void solution and
			discontinuity; like united itself with like in definite
			arrangement: and soon either in actual vision and
			possession, or in fixed reasonable hope, the image of the
			whole Enterprise had shaped itself, so to speak, into a
			solid mass. Cautiously yet courageously, through the
			twopenny post, application to the famed redoubtable
			<span class="special_emphasis">Oliver Yorke</span> was now made: an interview, interviews
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page8" name="page8"></a>8</span>with that singular man have taken place; with more
			of assurance on our side, with less of satire (at least of
			open satire) on his, than we anticipated;&#8212;for the rest,
			with such issue as is now visible. As to those same
			&#8216;patriotic <i>Libraries</i>,&#8217; the Hofrath&#8217;s counsel could only
			be viewed with silent amazement; but with his offer
			of Documents we joyfully and almost instantaneously
			closed. Thus, too, in the sure expectation of these,
			we already see our task begun; and this our <i>Sartor
			Resartus</i>, which is properly a &#8216;Life and Opinions of
			Herr Teufelsdröckh,&#8217; hourly advancing.</p>

			<p class="post_thoughtbreak">Of our fitness for the Enterprise, to which we have
			such title and vocation, it were perhaps uninteresting
			to say more. Let the British reader study and enjoy,
			in simplicity of heart, what is here presented him, and
			with whatever metaphysical acumen and talent for
			meditation he is possessed of. Let him strive to keep
			a free, open sense; cleared from the mists of prejudice,
			above all from the paralysis of cant; and directed rather
			to the Book itself than to the Editor of the Book. Who
			or what such Editor may be, must remain conjectural,
			and even insignificant:<span class="footnote_marker">*</span><span class="footnote">* With us even he still communicates in some sort of mask, or muffler: and, we have reason to think, under a feigned name!&#8212;O. Y.</span> it is a voice publishing
			tidings of the Philosophy of Clothes; undoubtedly
			a Spirit addressing Spirits: whoso hath ears, let him
			hear.</p>

			<p>On one other point the Editor thinks it needful to
			give warning: namely, that he is animated with a true
			though perhaps a feeble attachment to the Institutions
			of our Ancestors; and minded to defend these, according
			to ability, at all hazards; nay, it was partly with
			a view to such defence that he engaged in this undertaking.
			To stem, or if that be impossible, profitably to
			divert the current of Innovation, such a Volume as
			Teufelsdröckh&#8217;s, if cunningly planted down, were no
			despicable pile, or floodgate, in the logical wear.</p>

			<p>For the rest, be it nowise apprehended, that any
			personal connexion of ours with Teufelsdröckh, Heuschrecke,
			or this Philosophy of Clothes can pervert our
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page9" name="page9"></a>9</span>judgment, or sway us to extenuate or exaggerate.
			Powerless, we venture to promise, are those private
			Compliments themselves. Grateful they may well be;
			as generous illusions of friendship; as fair mementos
			of bygone unions, of those nights and suppers of the
			gods, when, lapped in the symphonies and harmonies of
			Philosophic Eloquence, though with baser accompaniments,
			the present Editor revelled in that feast of reason,
			never since vouchsafed him in so full measure! But
			what then? <i>Amicus Plato, magis amica veritas;</i>
			Teufelsdröckh is our friend, Truth is our divinity. In
			our historical and critical capacity, we hope we are
			strangers to all the world; have feud or favour with
			no one,&#8212;save indeed the Devil, with whom, as with
			the Prince of Lies and Darkness, we do at all times
			wage internecine war. This assurance, at an epoch
			when puffery and quackery have reached a height unexampled
			in the annals of mankind, and even English
			Editors, like Chinese Shopkeepers, must write on their
			door-lintels <em>No cheating here</em>,&#8212;we thought it good to
			premise.</p>

		</div>
		<div id="book_1_chapter_3" class="chapter">
			<p class="chapter_head">CHAPTER III</p>

			<h3 class="chapter_title">REMINISCENCES</h3>

			<p><span class="first_word">To</span> the Author&#8217;s private circle the appearance of this
			singular Work on Clothes must have occasioned little
			less surprise than it has to the rest of the world. For
			ourselves, at least, few things have been more unexpected.
			Professor Teufelsdröckh, at the period of our
			acquaintance with him, seemed to lead a quite still and
			self-contained life: a man devoted to the higher Philosophies,
			indeed; yet more likely, if he published at all,
			to publish a refutation of Hegel and Bardili, both of
			whom, strangely enough, he included under a common
			ban; than to descend, as he has here done, into the
			angry noisy Forum, with an Argument that cannot but
			exasperate and divide. Not, that we can remember,
			the Philosophy of Clothes once touched upon between
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page10" name="page10"></a>10</span>us. If through the high, silent, meditative
			Transcendentalism of our Friend we detected any
			practical tendency whatever, it was at most Political,
			and towards a certain prospective, and for the present
			quite speculative, Radicalism; as indeed some correspondence,
			on his part, with Herr Oken of Jena was
			now and then suspected; though his special contribution
			to the <i>Isis</i> could never be more than surmised at. But,
			at all events, nothing Moral, still less anything Didactico-Religious,
			was looked for from him.</p>

			<p>Well do we recollect the last words he spoke in our
			hearing; which indeed, with the Night they were
			uttered in, are to be forever remembered. Lifting his
			huge tumbler of <i>Gukguk</i>,<span class="footnote_marker">*</span><span class="footnote">* Gukguk is unhappily only an academical-beer.</span> and for a moment lowering
			his tobacco-pipe, he stood up in full Coffee-house (it was
			<i>Zur Grünen Gans</i>, the largest in Weissnichtwo, where
			all the Virtuosity, and nearly all the Intellect of the
			place assembled of an evening); and there, with low,
			soul-stirring tone, and the look truly of an angel, though
			whether of a white or of a black one might be dubious,
			proposed this toast: <i>Die Sache der Armen in Gottes
			und Teufels Namen</i> (The Cause of the Poor, in Heaven&#8217;s
			name and <span class="keep_together">&#8212;&#8212;&#8217;s</span>)! One full shout, breaking the leaden
			silence; then a gurgle of innumerable emptying
			bumpers, again followed by universal cheering, returned
			him loud acclaim. It was the finale of the night:
			resuming their pipes; in the highest enthusiasm, amid
			volumes of tobacco-smoke; triumphant, cloud-capt
			without and within, the assembly broke up, each to his
			thoughtful pillow. <i>Bleibt doch ein echter Spass- und
			Galgen-vogel</i>, said several; meaning thereby that, one
			day, he would probably be hanged for his democratic
			sentiments. <i>Wo steckt doch der Schalk?</i> added they,
			looking round: but Teufelsdröckh had retired by private
			alleys, and the Compiler of these pages beheld him no
			more.</p>

			<p>In such scenes has it been our lot to live with this
			Philosopher, such estimate to form of his purposes and
			powers. And yet, thou brave Teufelsdröckh, who could
			tell what lurked in thee? Under those thick locks of
			thine, so long and lank, overlapping roof-wise the
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page11" name="page11"></a>11</span>gravest face we ever in this world saw, there dwelt
			a most busy brain. In thy eyes too, deep under their
			shaggy brows, and looking out so still and dreamy,
			have we not noticed gleams of an ethereal or else a
			diabolic fire, and half-fancied that their stillness was but
			the rest of infinite motion, the <em>sleep</em> of a spinning-top?
			Thy little figure, there as, in loose, ill-brushed threadbare
			habiliments, thou sattest, amid litter and lumber,
			whole days, to &#8216;think and smoke tobacco,&#8217; held in it
			a mighty heart. The secrets of man&#8217;s Life were laid
			open to thee; thou sawest into the mystery of the
			Universe, farther than another; thou hadst <i>in petto</i> thy
			remarkable Volume on Clothes. Nay, was there not
			in that clear logically-founded Transcendentalism of
			thine; still more, in thy meek, silent, deep-seated
			Sansculottism, combined with a true princely Courtesy
			of inward nature, the visible rudiments of such speculation?
			But great men are too often unknown, or what
			is worse, misknown. Already, when we dreamed not of
			it, the warp of thy remarkable Volume lay on the loom;
			and silently, mysterious shuttles were putting in the
			woof!</p>

			<p class="post_thoughtbreak">How the Hofrath Heuschrecke is to furnish biographical
			data, in this case, may be a curious question;
			the answer of which, however, is happily not our concern,
			but his. To us it appeared, after repeated trial,
			that in Weissnichtwo, from the archives or memories
			of the best-informed classes, no Biography of Teufelsdröckh
			was to be gathered; not so much as a false one.
			He was a stranger there, wafted thither by what is called
			the course of circumstances; concerning whose parentage,
			birthplace, prospects, or pursuits, curiosity had
			indeed made inquiries, but satisfied herself with the
			most indistinct replies. For himself, he was a man so
			still and altogether unparticipating, that to question
			him even afar off on such particulars was a thing of
			more than usual delicacy: besides, in his sly way, he
			had ever some quaint turn, not without its satirical
			edge, wherewith to divert such intrusions, and deter
			you from the like. Wits spoke of him secretly as if he
			were a kind of Melchizedek, without father or mother
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page12" name="page12"></a>12</span>of any kind; sometimes, with reference to his great
			historic and statistic knowledge, and the vivid way he
			had of expressing himself like an eye-witness of distant
			transactions and scenes, they called him the <i>Ewige Jude</i>,
			Everlasting, or as we say, Wandering Jew.</p>

			<p>To the most, indeed, he had become not so much a
			Man as a Thing; which Thing doubtless they were
			accustomed to see, and with satisfaction; but no more
			thought of accounting for than for the fabrication of
			their daily <i>Allgemeine Zeitung</i>, or the domestic habits
			of the Sun. Both were there and welcome; the world
			enjoyed what good was in them, and thought no more
			of the matter. The man Teufelsdröckh passed and
			repassed, in his little circle, as one of those originals
			and nondescripts, more frequent in German Universities
			than elsewhere; of whom, though you see them alive,
			and feel certain enough that they must have a History,
			no History seems to be discoverable; or only such as
			men give of mountain rocks and antediluvian ruins:
			That they may have been created by unknown agencies,
			are in a state of gradual decay, and for the present reflect
			light and resist pressure; that is, are visible and tangible
			objects in this phantasm world, where so much other
			mystery is.</p>

			<p>It was to be remarked that though, by title and
			diploma, <i>Professor der Allerley-Wissenschaft</i>, or as we
			should say in English, &#8216;Professor of Things in
			General,&#8217; he had never delivered any Course; perhaps
			never been incited thereto by any public furtherance or
			requisition. To all appearance, the enlightened Government
			of Weissnichtwo, in founding their New University,
			imagined they had done enough, if &#8216;in times like ours,&#8217;
			as the half-official Program expressed it, &#8216;when all
			things are, rapidly or slowly, resolving themselves into
			Chaos, a Professorship of this kind had been established;
			whereby, as occasion called, the task of bodying somewhat
			forth again from such Chaos might be, even
			slightly, facilitated.&#8217; That actual Lectures should be
			held, and Public Classes for the &#8216;Science of Things in
			General,&#8217; they doubtless considered premature; on
			which ground too they had only established the Professorship,
			nowise endowed it; so that Teufelsdröckh,
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page13" name="page13"></a>13</span>&#8216;recommended by the highest Names,&#8217; had been promoted
			thereby to a Name merely.</p>

			<p>Great, among the more enlightened classes, was the
			admiration of this new Professorship: how an enlightened
			Government had seen into the Want of
			the Age (<i>Zeitbedürfniss</i>); how at length, instead
			of Denial and Destruction, we were to have a science
			of Affirmation and Reconstruction; and Germany and
			Weissnichtwo were where they should be, in the
			vanguard of the world. Considerable also was the
			wonder at the new Professor, dropt opportunely enough
			into the nascent University; so able to lecture,
			should occasion call; so ready to hold his peace for
			indefinite periods, should an enlightened Government
			consider that occasion did not call. But such admiration
			and such wonder, being followed by no act to keep
			them living, could last only nine days; and, long before
			our visit to that scene, had quite died away. The
			more cunning heads thought it was all an expiring
			clutch at popularity, on the part of a Minister, whom
			domestic embarrassments, court intrigues, old age,
			and dropsy soon afterwards finally drove from the
			helm.</p>

			<p>As for Teufelsdröckh, except by his nightly appearances
			at the <i>Grüne Gans</i>, Weissnichtwo saw little of
			him, felt little of him. Here, over his tumbler of Gukguk,
			he sat reading Journals; sometimes contemplatively
			looking into the clouds of his tobacco-pipe, without
			other visible employment: always, from his mild
			ways, an agreeable phenomenon there; more especially
			when he opened his lips for speech; on which occasions
			the whole Coffee-house would hush itself into silence,
			as if sure to hear something noteworthy. Nay, perhaps
			to hear a whole series and river of the most
			memorable utterances; such as, when once thawed, he
			would for hours indulge in, with fit audience: and the
			more memorable, as issuing from a head apparently not
			more interested in them, not more conscious of them,
			than is the sculptured stone head of some public fountain,
			which through its brass mouth-tube emits water
			to the worthy and the unworthy; careless whether it
			be for cooking victuals or quenching conflagrations;
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page14" name="page14"></a>14</span>indeed, maintains the same earnest assiduous look,
			whether any water be flowing or not.</p>

			<p>To the Editor of these sheets, as to a young enthusiastic
			Englishman, however unworthy, Teufelsdröckh
			opened himself perhaps more than to the most. Pity
			only that we could not then half guess his importance,
			and scrutinise him with due power of vision! We
			enjoyed, what not three men in Weissnichtwo could
			boast of, a certain degree of access to the Professor&#8217;s
			private domicile. It was the attic floor of the highest
			house in the Wahngasse; and might truly be called
			the pinnacle of Weissnichtwo, for it rose sheer up above
			the contiguous roofs, themselves rising from elevated
			ground. Moreover, with its windows it looked towards
			all the four <i>Orte</i>, or as the Scotch say, and we ought
			to say, <i>Airts</i>: the sitting-room itself commanded three;
			another came to view in the <i>Schlafgemach</i> (bedroom) at
			the opposite end; to say nothing of the kitchen, which
			offered two, as it were, <em>duplicates</em>, and showing nothing
			new. So that it was in fact the speculum or watch-tower
			of Teufelsdröckh; wherefrom, sitting at ease,
			he might see the whole life-circulation of that considerable
			City; the streets and lanes of which, with all their
			doing and driving (<i>Thun und Treiben</i>), were for the
			most part visible there.</p>

			<p>&#8220;I look down into all that wasp-nest or bee-hive,&#8221;
			have we heard him say, &#8220;and witness their wax-laying
			and honey-making, and poison-brewing, and choking
			by sulphur. From the Palace esplanade, where music
			plays while Serene Highness is pleased to eat his
			victuals, down to the low lane, where in her door-sill
			the aged widow, knitting for a thin livelihood, sits to
			feel the afternoon sun, I see it all; for, except the
			Schlosskirche weathercock, no biped stands so high.
			Couriers arrive bestrapped and bebooted, bearing Joy
			and Sorrow bagged-up in pouches of leather: there,
			top-laden, and with four swift horses, rolls-in the country
			Baron and his household; here, on timber-leg, the
			lamed Soldier hops painfully along, begging alms: a
			thousand carriages, and wains, and cars, come tumbling-in
			with Food, with young Rusticity, and other
			Raw Produce, inanimate or animate, and go tumbling
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page15" name="page15"></a>15</span>out again with Produce manufactured. That living
			flood, pouring through these streets, of all qualities and
			ages, knowest thou whence it is coming, whither it is
			going? <i>Aus der Ewigkeit, zu der Ewigkeit hin</i>:
			From Eternity, onwards to Eternity! These are Apparitions:
			what else? Are they not Souls rendered
			visible: in Bodies, that took shape and will lose it,
			melting into air? Their solid Pavement is a picture
			of the Sense; they walk on the bosom of Nothing, blank
			Time is behind them and before them. Or fanciest
			thou, the red and yellow Clothes-screen yonder, with
			spurs on its heels and feather in its crown, is but of
			Today, without a Yesterday or a Tomorrow; and had
			not rather its Ancestor alive when Hengst and Horsa
			overran thy Island? Friend, thou seest here a living
			link in that Tissue of History, which inweaves all
			Being: watch well, or it will be past thee, and seen
			no more.&#8221;</p>

			<p>&#8220;<i>Ach, mein Lieber!</i>&#8221; said he once, at midnight,
			when we had returned from the Coffee-house in rather
			earnest talk, &#8220;it is a true sublimity to dwell here.
			These fringes of lamplight, struggling up through
			smoke and thousandfold exhalation, some fathoms into
			the ancient reign of Night, what thinks Boötes of them,
			as he leads his Hunting-Dogs over the Zenith in their
			leash of sidereal fire? That stifled hum of Midnight,
			when Traffic has lain down to rest; and the chariot-wheels
			of Vanity, still rolling here and there through
			distant streets, are bearing her to Halls roofed-in, and
			lighted to the due pitch for her; and only Vice and
			Misery, to prowl or to moan like nightbirds, are abroad:
			that hum, I say, like the stertorous, unquiet slumber
			of sick Life, is heard in Heaven! Oh, under that
			hideous covelet of vapours, and putrefactions, and unimaginable
			gases, what a Fermenting-vat lies simmering
			and hid! The joyful and the sorrowful are there;
			men are dying there, men are being born; men are
			praying,&#8212;on the other side of a brick partition, men are
			cursing; and around them all is the vast, void Night.
			The proud Grandee still lingers in his perfumed saloons,
			or reposes within damask curtains; Wretchedness
			cowers into truckle-beds, or shivers hunger-stricken into
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page16" name="page16"></a>16</span>its lair of straw: in obscure cellars, <i>Rouge-et-Noir</i>
			languidly emits its voice-of-destiny to haggard hungry
			Villains; while Councillors of State sit plotting, and
			playing their high chess-game, whereof the pawns are
			Men. The Lover whispers his mistress that the coach
			is ready; and she, full of hope and fear, glides down,
			to fly with him over the borders: the Thief, still more
			silently, sets-to his picklocks and crowbars, or lurks
			in wait till the watchmen first snore in their boxes.
			Gay mansions, with supper-rooms and dancing-rooms,
			are full of light and music and high-swelling hearts;
			but, in the Condemned Cells, the pulse of life beats
			tremulous and faint, and bloodshot eyes look-out through
			the darkness, which is around and within, for the light
			of a stern last morning. Six men are to be hanged
			on the morrow: comes no hammering from the <i>Rabenstein</i>?&#8212;their
			gallows must even now be o&#8217; building.
			Upwards of five-hundred-thousand two-legged animals
			without feathers lie round us, in horizontal positions;
			their heads all in nightcaps, and full of the foolishest
			dreams. Riot cries aloud, and staggers and swaggers
			in his rank dens of shame; and the Mother, with
			streaming hair, kneels over her pallid dying infant,
			whose cracked lips only her tears now moisten.&#8212;All
			these heaped and huddled together, with nothing but
			a little carpentry and masonry between them;&#8212;crammed
			in, like salted fish in their barrel;&#8212;or weltering, shall
			I say, like an Egyptian pitcher of tamed vipers, each
			struggling to get its <em>head above</em> the others: <em>such</em> work
			goes on under that smoke-counterpane!&#8212;But I, <i>mein
			Werther</i>, sit above it all; I am alone with the Stars.&#8221;</p>

			<p>We looked in his face to see whether, in the utterance
			of such extraordinary Night-thoughts, no feeling
			might be traced there; but with the light we had, which
			indeed was only a single tallow-light, and far enough
			from the window, nothing save that old calmness and
			fixedness was visible.</p>

			<p>These were the Professor&#8217;s talking seasons: most
			commonly he spoke in mere monosyllables, or sat altogether
			silent, and smoked; while the visitor had liberty
			either to say what he listed, receiving for answer an
			occasional grunt; or to look round for a space, and
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page17" name="page17"></a>17</span>then take himself away. It was a strange apartment;
			full of books and tattered papers, and miscellaneous
			shreds of all conceivable substances, &#8216;united in a common
			element of dust.&#8217; Books lay on tables, and below
			tables; here fluttered a sheet of manuscript, there a
			torn handkerchief, or nightcap hastily thrown aside; ink-bottles
			alternated with bread-crusts, coffee-pots, tobacco-boxes,
			Periodical Literature, and Blücher Boots. Old
			Lieschen (Lisekin, &#8217;Liza), who was his bed-maker and
			stove-lighter, his washer and wringer, cook, errand-maid,
			and general lion&#8217;s-provider, and for the rest a
			very orderly creature, had no sovereign authority in
			this last citadel of Teufelsdröckh; only some once in
			the month she half-forcibly made her may thither, with
			broom and duster, and (Teufelsdröckh hastily saving his
			manuscripts) effected a partial clearance, a jail-delivery
			of such lumber as was not literary. These were her
			<i>Erdbeben</i> (earthquakes), which Teufelsdröckh dreaded
			worse than the pestilence; nevertheless, to such length
			he had been forced to comply. Glad would he have
			been to sit here philosophising forever, or till the litter,
			by accumulation, drove him out of doors: but Lieschen
			was his right-arm, and spoon, and necessary of life, and
			would not be flatly gainsayed. We can still remember
			the ancient woman; so silent that some thought her
			dumb; deaf also you would often have supposed her;
			for Teufelsdröckh, and Teufelsdröckh only, would she
			serve or give heed to; and with him she seemed to
			communicate chiefly by signs; if it were not rather by
			some secret divination that she guessed all his wants,
			and supplied them. Assiduous old dame! she scoured,
			and sorted, and swept, in her kitchen, with the least
			possible violence to the ear; yet all was tight and right
			there: hot and black came the coffee ever at the due
			moment; and the speechless Lieschen herself looked
			out on you, from under her clean white coif with its
			lappets, through her clean withered face and wrinkles,
			with a look of helpful intelligence, almost of benevolence.</p>

			<p>Few strangers, as above hinted, had admittance
			hither: the only one we ever saw there, ourselves excepted,
			was the Hofrath Heuschrecke, already known,
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page18" name="page18"></a>18</span>by name and expectation, to the readers of these pages.
			To us, at that period, Herr Heuschrecke seemed one
			of those purse-mouthed, crane-necked, clean-brushed,
			pacific individuals, perhaps sufficiently distinguished in
			society by this fact, that, in dry weather or in wet, &#8216;they
			never appear without their umbrella.&#8217; Had we not
			known with what &#8216;little wisdom&#8217; the world is governed;
			and how, in Germany as elsewhere, the ninety-and-nine
			Public Men can for most part be but mute train-bearers
			to the hundredth, perhaps but stalking-horses and willing
			or unwilling dupes,&#8212;it might have seemed wonderful
			how Herr Heuschrecke should be named a Rath, or
			Councillor, and Counsellor, even in Weissnichtwo.
			What counsel to any man, or to any woman, could this
			particular Hofrath give; in whose loose, zigzag figure;
			in whose thin visage, as it went jerking to and fro, in
			minute incessant fluctuation,&#8212;you traced rather confusion
			worse confounded; at most, Timidity and physical
			Cold? Some indeed said withal, he was &#8216;the
			very Spirit of Love embodied&#8217;: blue earnest eyes, full
			of sadness and kindness; purse ever open, and so forth;
			the whole of which, we shall now hope, for many
			reasons, was not quite groundless. Nevertheless friend
			Teufelsdröckh&#8217;s outline, who indeed handled the burin
			like few in these cases, was probably the best: <i>Er hat
			Gemüth und Geist, hat wenigstens gehabt, doch ohne
			Organ, ohne Schicksals-Gunst; ist gegenwärtig aber
			halb-zerrüttet, halb-erstarrt</i>, &#8220;He has heart and talent,
			at least has had such, yet without fit mode of utterance,
			or favour of Fortune; and so is now half-cracked, half-congealed.&#8221;&#8212;What
			the Hofrath shall think of this when
			he sees it, readers may wonder: we, safe in the stronghold
			of Historical Fidelity, are careless.</p>

			<p>The main point, doubtless, for us all, is his love of
			Teufelsdröckh, which indeed was also by far the most
			decisive feature of Heuschrecke himself. We are enabled
			to assert that he hung on the Professor with the
			fondness of a Boswell for his Johnson. And perhaps
			with the like return; for Teufelsdröckh treated his gaunt
			admirer with little outward regard, as some half-rational
			or altogether irrational friend, and at best loved him out
			of gratitude and by habit. On the other hand, it was
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page19" name="page19"></a>19</span>curious to observe with what reverent kindness, and a
			sort of fatherly protection, our Hofrath, being the elder,
			richer, and as he fondly imagined far more practically
			influential of the two, looked and tended on his little
			Sage, whom he seemed to consider as a living oracle.
			Let but Teufelsdröckh open his mouth, Heuschrecke&#8217;s
			also unpuckered itself into a free doorway, besides his
			being all eye and all ear, so that nothing might be lost:
			and then, at every pause in the harangue, he gurgled-out
			his pursy chuckle of a cough-laugh (for the machinery
			of laughter took some time to get in motion, and seemed
			crank and slack), or else his twanging nasal, <i>Bravo!
			Das glaub&#8217; ich</i>; in either case, by way of heartiest approval.
			In short, if Teufelsdröckh was Dalai-Lama, of
			which, except perhaps in his self-seclusion, and god-like
			indifference, there was no symptom, then might Heuschrecke
			pass for his chief Talapoin, to whom no dough-pill
			he could knead and publish was other than medicinal
			and sacred.</p>

			<p>In such environment, social, domestic, physical, did
			Teufelsdröckh, at the time of our acquaintance, and
			most likely does he still, live and meditate. Here,
			perched-up in his high Wahngasse watch-tower, and
			often, in solitude, outwatching the Bear, it was that the
			indomitable Inquirer fought all his battles with Dulness
			and Darkness; here, in all probability, that he wrote
			this surprising Volume on <i>Clothes</i>. Additional particulars:
			of his age, which was of that standing middle
			sort you could only guess at; of his wide surtout; the
			colour of his trousers, fashion of his broad-brimmed
			steeple-hat, and so forth, we might report, but do not.
			The Wisest truly is, in these times, the Greatest; so
			that an enlightened curiosity, leaving Kings and suchlike
			to rest very much on their own basis, turns more
			and more to the Philosophic Class: nevertheless, what
			reader expects that, with all our writing and reporting,
			Teufelsdröckh could be brought home to him, till once
			the Documents arrive? His Life, Fortunes, and Bodily
			Presence, are as yet hidden from us, or matter only
			of faint conjecture. But, on the other hand, does not
			his Soul lie enclosed in this remarkable Volume, much
			more truly than Pedro Garcia&#8217;s did in the buried Bag
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page20" name="page20"></a>20</span>of Doubloons? To the soul of Diogenes Teufelsdröckh,
			to his opinions, namely, on the &#8216;Origin and Influence
			of Clothes,&#8217; we for the present gladly return.</p>

		</div>
		<div id="book_1_chapter_4" class="chapter">
			<p class="chapter_head">CHAPTER IV</p>

			<h3 class="chapter_title">CHARACTERISTICS</h3>

			<p><span class="first_word">It</span> were a piece of vain flattery to pretend that this
			Work on Clothes entirely contents us; that it is not,
			like all works of genius, like the very Sun, which,
			though the highest published creation, or work of
			genius, has nevertheless black spots and troubled nebulosities
			amid its effulgence,&#8212;a mixture of insight, inspiration,
			with dulness, double-vision, and even utter
			blindness.</p>

			<p>Without committing ourselves to those enthusiastic
			praises and prophesyings of the <i>Weissnichtwo&#8217;sche
			Anzeiger</i>, we admitted that the Book had in a high
			degree excited us to self-activity, which is the best effect
			of any book; that it had even operated changes in our
			way of thought; nay, that it promised to prove, as it
			were, the opening of a new mine-shaft, wherein the
			whole world of Speculation might henceforth dig to
			unknown depths. More especially it may now be declared
			that Professor Teufelsdröckh&#8217;s acquirements,
			patience of research, philosophic and even poetic vigour,
			are here made indisputably manifest; and unhappily no
			less his prolixity and tortuosity and manifold ineptitude;
			that, on the whole, as in opening new mine-shafts is
			not unreasonable, there is much rubbish in his Book,
			though likewise specimens of almost invaluable ore. A
			paramount popularity in England we cannot promise
			him. Apart from the choice of such a topic as Clothes,
			too often the manner of treating it betokens in the
			Author a rusticity and academic seclusion, unblamable,
			indeed inevitable in a German, but fatal to his success
			with our public.</p>

			<p>Of good society Teufelsdröckh appears to have seen
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page21" name="page21"></a>21</span>little, or has mostly forgotten what he saw. He speaks-out
			with a strange plainness; calls many things by their
			mere dictionary names. To him the Upholsterer is no
			Pontiff, neither is any Drawing-room a Temple, were it
			never so begilt and overhung: &#8216;a whole immensity
			of Brussels carpets, and pier-glasses, and or-molu,&#8217; as
			he himself expresses it, &#8216;cannot hide from me that such
			Drawing-room is simply a section of Infinite Space,
			where so many God-created Souls do for the time meet
			together.&#8217; To Teufelsdröckh the highest Duchess is
			respectable, is venerable; but nowise for her pearl bracelets
			and Malines laces: in his eyes, the star of a Lord
			is little less and little more than the broad button of
			Birmingham spelter in a Clown&#8217;s smock; &#8216;each is an
			implement,&#8217; he says, &#8216;in its kind; a tag for <em>hooking-together</em>;
			and, for the rest, was dug from the earth,
			and hammered on a smithy before smith&#8217;s fingers.&#8217;
			Thus does the Professor look in men&#8217;s faces with a
			strange impartiality, a strange scientific freedom; like
			a man unversed in the higher circles, like a man dropped
			thither from the Moon. Rightly considered, it is in this
			peculiarity, running through his whole system of
			thought, that all these short-comings, over-shootings,
			and multiform perversities, take rise: if indeed they
			have not a second source, also natural enough, in his
			Transcendental Philosophies, and humour of looking
			at all Matter and Material things as Spirit; whereby
			truly his case were but the more hopeless, the more
			lamentable.</p>

			<p>To the Thinkers of this nation, however, of which
			class it is firmly believed there are individuals yet
			extant, we can safely recommend the Work: nay, who
			knows but among the fashionable ranks too, if it be
			true, as Teufelsdröckh maintains, that &#8216;within the
			most starched cravat there passes a windpipe and
			weasand, and under the thickliest embroidered waistcoat
			beats a heart,&#8217;&#8212;the force of that rapt earnestness
			may be felt, and here and there an arrow of the
			soul pierce through? In our wild Seer, shaggy, unkempt,
			like a Baptist living on locusts and wild honey,
			there is an untutored energy, a silent, as it were unconscious,
			strength, which, except in the higher walks of
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page22" name="page22"></a>22</span>Literature, must be rare. Many a deep glance, and
			often with unspeakable precision, has he cast into mysterious
			Nature, and the still more mysterious Life of
			Man. Wonderful it is with what cutting words, now
			and then, he severs asunder the confusion; shears
			down, were it furlongs deep, into the true centre of
			the matter; and there not only hits the nail on the
			head, but with crushing force smites it home, and buries
			it.&#8212;On the other hand, let us be free to admit, he is
			the most unequal writer breathing. Often after some
			such feat, he will play truant for long pages, and go
			dawdling and dreaming, and mumbling and maundering
			the merest commonplaces, as if he were asleep with
			eyes open, which indeed he is.</p>

			<p>Of his boundless Learning, and how all reading and
			literature in most known tongues, from <i>Sanchoniathon</i>
			to <i>Dr Lingard</i>, from your Oriental <i>Shasters</i>, and <i>Talmuds</i>,
			and <i>Korans</i>, with Cassini&#8217;s <i>Siamese Tables</i>, and
			Laplace&#8217;s <i>Mécanique Céleste</i>, down to <i>Robinson Crusoe</i>
			and the <i>Belfast Town and Country Almanack</i>, are
			familiar to him,&#8212;we shall say nothing: for unexampled
			as it is with us, to the Germans such universality
			of study passes without wonder, as a thing commendable,
			indeed, but natural, indispensable, and there
			of course. A man that devotes his life to learning,
			shall he not be learned?</p>

			<p>In respect of style our Author manifests the same
			genial capability, marred too often by the same rudeness,
			inequality, and apparent want of intercourse with
			the higher classes. Occasionally, as above hinted, we
			find consummate vigour, a true inspiration; his burning
			thoughts step forth in fit burning words, like so
			many full-formed Minervas, issuing amid flame and
			splendour from Jove&#8217;s head; a rich, idiomatic diction,
			picturesque allusions, fiery poetic emphasis, or quaint
			tricksy turns; all the graces and terrors of a wild Imagination,
			wedded to the clearest Intellect, alternate
			in beautiful vicissitude. Were it not that sheer sleeping
			and soporific passages; circumlocutions, repetitions,
			touches even of pure doting jargon, so often intervene!
			On the whole, Professor Teufelsdröckh is not a cultivated
			writer. Of his sentences perhaps not more than
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page23" name="page23"></a>23</span>nine-tenths stand straight on their legs; the remainder
			are in quite angular attitudes, buttressed-up by props
			(of parentheses and dashes), and ever with this or the
			other tagrag hanging from them; a few even sprawl-out
			helplessly on all sides, quite broken-backed and
			dismembered. Nevertheless, in almost his very worst
			moods, there lies in him a singular attraction. A wild
			tone pervades the whole utterance of the man, like its
			keynote and regulator; now screwing itself aloft as
			into the Song of Spirits, or else the shrill mockery of
			Fiends; now sinking in cadences, not without melodious
			heartiness, though sometimes abrupt enough, into
			the common pitch, when we hear it only as a monotonous
			hum; of which hum the true character is extremely
			difficult to fix. Up to this hour we have never fully
			satisfied ourselves whether it is a tone and hum of real
			Humour, which we reckon among the very highest
			qualities of genius, or some echo of mere Insanity and
			Inanity, which doubtless ranks below the very lowest.</p>

			<p>Under a like difficulty, in spite even of our personal
			intercourse, do we still lie with regard to the Professor&#8217;s
			moral feeling. Gleams of an ethereal Love burst forth
			from him, soft wailings of infinite pity; he could clasp
			the whole Universe into his bosom, and keep it warm;
			it seems as if under that rude exterior there dwelt a
			very seraph. Then again he is so sly and still, so
			imperturbably saturnine; shows such indifference,
			malign coolness towards all that men strive after; and
			ever with some half-visible wrinkle of a bitter sardonic
			humour, if indeed it be not mere stolid callousness,&#8212;that
			you look on him almost with a shudder, as on
			some incarnate Mephistopheles, to whom this great
			terrestrial and celestial Round, after all, were but some
			huge foolish Whirligig, where kings and beggars, and
			angels and demons, and stars and street-sweepings, were
			chaotically whirled, in which only children could take
			interest. His look, as we mentioned, is probably the
			gravest ever seen: yet it is not of that cast-iron gravity
			frequent enough among our own Chancery suitors;
			but rather the gravity as of some silent, high-encircled
			mountain-pool, perhaps the crater of an extinct volcano;
			into whose black deeps you fear to gaze: those
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page24" name="page24"></a>24</span>eyes, those lights that sparkle in it, may indeed be
			reflexes of the heavenly Stars, but perhaps also glances
			from the region of Nether Fire!</p>

			<p>Certainly a most involved, self-secluded, altogether
			enigmatic nature, this of Teufelsdröckh! Here, however,
			we gladly recall to mind that once we saw him
			<em>laugh</em>; once only, perhaps it was the first and last
			time in his life; but then such a peal of laughter,
			enough to have awakened the Seven Sleepers! It was
			of Jean Paul&#8217;s doing: some single billow in that vast
			World-Mahlstrom of Humour, with its heaven-kissing
			coruscations, which is now, alas, all congealed in the
			frost of death! The large-bodied Poet and the small,
			both large enough in soul, sat talking miscellaneously
			together, the present Editor being privileged to listen;
			and now Paul, in his serious way, was giving one of
			those inimitable &#8216;Extra-harangues&#8217;; and, as it
			chanced, On the Proposal for a <i>Cast-metal King</i>:
			gradually a light kindled in our Professor&#8217;s eyes and
			face, a beaming, mantling, loveliest light; through
			those murky features, a radiant, ever-young Apollo
			looked; and he burst forth like the neighing of all
			Tattersall&#8217;s,&#8212;tears streaming down his cheeks, pipe
			held aloft, foot clutched into the air,&#8212;loud, long-continuing,
			uncontrollable; a laugh not of the face and
			diaphragm only, but of the whole man from head to
			heel. The present Editor, who laughed indeed, yet
			with measure, began to fear all was not right: however,
			Teufelsdröckh composed himself, and sank into
			his old stillness; on his inscrutable countenance there
			was, if anything, a slight look of shame; and Richter
			himself could not rouse him again. Readers who have
			any tincture of Psychology know how much is to be
			inferred from this; and that no man who has once
			heartily and wholly laughed can be altogether irreclaimably
			bad. How much lies in Laughter: the cipher-key,
			wherewith we decipher the whole man! Some
			men wear an everlasting barren simper; in the smile
			of others lies a cold glitter as of ice: the fewest are
			able to laugh, what can be called laughing, but only
			sniff and titter and snigger from the throat outwards;
			or at best, produce some whiffling husky cachinnation,
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page25" name="page25"></a>25</span>as if they were laughing through wool: of none such
			comes good. The man who cannot laugh is not only
			fit for treasons, stratagems, and spoils; but his whole
			life is already a treason and a stratagem.</p>

			<p>Considered as an Author, Herr Teufelsdröckh has
			one scarcely pardonable fault, doubtless his worst: an
			almost total want of arrangement. In this remarkable
			Volume, it is true, his adherence to the mere course of
			Time produces, through the Narrative portions, a
			certain show of outward method; but of true logical
			method and sequence there is too little. Apart from
			its multifarious sections and subdivisions, the Work
			naturally falls into two Parts; a Historical-Descriptive,
			and a Philosophical-Speculative: but falls, unhappily,
			by no firm line of demarcation; in that labyrinthic
			combination, each Part overlaps, and indents, and indeed
			runs quite through the other. Many sections are
			of a debatable rubric or even quite nondescript and
			unnameable; whereby the Book not only loses in accessibility,
			but too often distresses us like some mad
			banquet, wherein all courses had been confounded, and
			fish and flesh, soup and solid, oyster-sauce, lettuces,
			Rhine-wine and French mustard, were hurled into one
			huge tureen or trough, and the hungry Public invited
			to help itself. To bring what order we can out of this
			Chaos shall be part of our endeavour.</p>

		</div>
		<div id="book_1_chapter_5" class="chapter">
			<p class="chapter_head">CHAPTER V</p>

			<h3 class="chapter_title">THE WORLD IN CLOTHES</h3>

			<p>&#8216;<span class="first_word">As</span> Montesquieu wrote a <i>Spirit of Laws</i>,&#8217; observes
			our Professor, &#8216;so could I write a <i>Spirit of Clothes</i>;
			thus, with an <i>Esprit des Lois</i>, properly an <i>Esprit de
			Coutumes</i>, we should have an <i>Esprit de Costumes</i>.
			For neither in tailoring nor in legislating does man
			proceed by mere Accident, but the hand is ever guided
			on by mysterious operations of the mind. In all his
			Modes, and habilatory endeavours, an Architectural
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page26" name="page26"></a>26</span>Idea will be found lurking; his Body and the Cloth
			are the site and materials whereon and whereby his
			beautified edifice, of a Person, is to be built. Whether
			he flow gracefully out in folded mantles, based on light
			sandals; tower-up in high headgear, from amid peaks,
			spangles and bell-girdles; swell-out in starched ruffs,
			buckram stuffings, and monstrous tuberosities; or girth
			himself into separate sections, and front the world an
			Agglomeration of four limbs,&#8212;will depend on the
			nature of such Architectural Idea: whether Grecian,
			Gothic, Later-Gothic, or altogether Modern, and
			Parisian or Anglo-Dandiacal. Again, what meaning
			lies in Colour! From the soberest drab to the high-flaming
			scarlet, spiritual idiosyncrasies unfold themselves
			in choice of Colour: if the Cut betoken Intellect
			and Talent, so does the Colour betoken Temper and
			Heart. In all which, among nations as among individuals,
			there is an incessant, indubitable, though
			infinitely complex working of Cause and Effect: every
			snip of the Scissors has been regulated and prescribed
			by ever-active Influences, which doubtless to Intelligences
			of a superior order are neither invisible nor
			illegible.</p>

			<p>&#8216;For such superior Intelligences a Cause-and-Effect
			Philosophy of Clothes, as of Laws, were probably a
			comfortable winter-evening entertainment: nevertheless,
			for inferior Intelligences, like men, such Philosophies
			have always seemed to me uninstructive enough.
			Nay, what is your Montesquieu himself but a clever
			infant spelling Letters from a hieroglyphical prophetic
			Book, the lexicon of which lies in Eternity, in Heaven?&#8212;Let
			any Cause-and-Effect Philosopher explain, not
			why I wear such and such a Garment, obey such and
			such a Law; but even why <em>I</em> am <em>here</em>, to wear and
			obey anything!&#8212;Much, therefore, if not the whole, of
			that same <i>Spirit of Clothes</i> I shall suppress, as hypothetical,
			ineffectual, and even impertinent: naked
			Facts, and Deductions drawn therefrom in quite another
			than that omniscient style, are my humbler and proper
			province.&#8217;</p>

			<p>Acting on which prudent restriction, Teufelsdröckh
			has nevertheless contrived to take-in a well-nigh
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page27" name="page27"></a>27</span>boundless extent of field; at least, the boundaries too
			often lie quite beyond our horizon. Selection being
			indispensable, we shall here glance-over his First Part
			only in the most cursory manner. This First Part is,
			no doubt, distinguished by omnivorous learning, and
			utmost patience and fairness: at the same time, in its
			results and delineations, it is much more likely to interest
			the Compilers of some <i>Library</i> of General, Entertaining,
			Useful, or even Useless Knowledge than the
			miscellaneous readers of these pages. Was it this
			Part of the Book which Heuschrecke had in view, when
			he recommended us to that joint-stock vehicle of publication,
			&#8216;at present the glory of British Literature&#8217;?
			If so, the Library Editors are welcome to dig in it for
			their own behoof.</p>

			<p>To the First Chapter, which turns on Paradise and
			Fig-leaves, and leads us into interminable disquisitions
			of a mythological, metaphorical, cabalistico-sartorial and
			quite antediluvian cast, we shall content ourselves with
			giving an unconcerned approval. Still less have we
			to do with &#8216;Lilis, Adam&#8217;s first wife, whom, according
			to the Talmudists, he had before Eve, and who bore
			him, in that wedlock, the whole progeny of aerial,
			aquatic, and terrestrial Devils,&#8217;&#8212;very needlessly, we
			think. On this portion of the Work, with its profound
			glances into the <i>Adam-Kadmon</i>, or Primeval Element,
			here strangely brought into relation with the <i>Nifl</i> and
			<i>Muspel</i> (Darkness and Light) of the antique North, it
			may be enough to say, that its correctness of deduction,
			and depth of Talmudic and Rabbinical lore have filled
			perhaps not the worst Hebraist in Britain with something
			like astonishment.</p>

			<p>But, quitting this twilight region, Teufelsdröckh
			hastens from the Tower of Babel, to follow the dispersion
			of Mankind over the whole habitable and habilable
			globe. Walking by the light of Oriental, Pelasgic,
			Scandinavian, Egyptian, Otaheitean, Ancient and
			Modern researches of every conceivable kind, he strives
			to give us in compressed shape (as the Nürnbergers
			give an <i>Orbis Pictus</i>) an <i>Orbis Vestitus</i>; or view of the
			costumes of all mankind, in all countries, in all times.
			It is here that to the Antiquarian, to the Historian, we
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page28" name="page28"></a>28</span>can triumphantly say: Fall to! Here is learning: an
			irregular Treasury, if you will; but inexhaustible as
			the Hoard of King Nibelung, which twelve wagons in
			twelve days, at the rate of three journeys a day, could
			not carry off. Sheepskin cloaks and wampum belts;
			phylacteries, stoles, albs; chlamydes, togas, Chinese
			silks, Afghaun shawls, trunk-hose, leather breeches,
			Celtic philibegs (though breeches, as the name <i>Gallia
			Braccata</i> indicates, are the more ancient), Hussar
			cloaks, Vandyke tippets, ruffs, fardingales, are brought
			vividly before us,&#8212;even the Kilmarnock nightcap is
			not forgotten. For most part, too, we must admit
			that the Learning, heterogeneous as it is, and tumbled-down
			quite pell-mell, is true concentrated and purified
			Learning, the drossy parts smelted out and thrown
			aside.</p>

			<p>Philosophical reflections intervene, and sometimes
			touching pictures of human life. Of this sort the
			following has surprised us. The first purpose of
			Clothes, as our Professor imagines, was not warmth or
			decency, but ornament. &#8216;Miserable indeed,&#8217; says he,
			&#8216;was the condition of the Aboriginal Savage, glaring
			fiercely from under his fleece of hair, which with the
			beard reached down to his loins, and hung round him
			like a matted cloak; the rest of his body sheeted in
			its thick natural fell. He loitered in the sunny glades
			of the forest, living on wild-fruits; or, as the ancient
			Caledonian, squatted himself in morasses, lurking for
			his bestial or human prey; without implements, without
			arms, save the ball of heavy Flint, to which, that
			his sole possession and defence might not be lost, he
			had attached a long cord of plaited thongs; thereby
			recovering as well as hurling it with deadly unerring
			skill. Nevertheless, the pains of Hunger and Revenge
			once satisfied, his next care was not Comfort but Decoration
			(<i>Putz</i>). Warmth he found in the toils of the
			chase; or amid dried leaves, in his hollow tree, in his
			bark shed, or natural grotto: but for Decoration he
			must have Clothes. Nay, among wild people we find
			tattooing and painting even prior to Clothes. The first
			spiritual want of a barbarous man is Decoration, as
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page29" name="page29"></a>29</span>indeed we still see among the barbarous classes in
			civilised countries.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Reader, the heaven-inspired melodious Singer;
			loftiest Serene Highness; nay thy own amber-locked,
			snow-and-rose-bloom Maiden, worthy to glide sylphlike
			almost on air, whom thou lovest, worshippest as a
			divine Presence, which, indeed, symbolically taken, she
			is,&#8212;has descended, like thyself, from that same hair-mantled,
			flint-hurling Aboriginal Anthropophagus! Out
			of the eater cometh forth meat; out of the strong
			cometh forth sweetness. What changes are wrought,
			not by time, yet in Time! For not Mankind only, but
			all that Mankind does or beholds, is in continual
			growth, regenesis and self-perfecting vitality. Cast
			forth thy Act, thy Word, into the ever-living, ever-working
			Universe: it is a seed-grain that cannot die;
			unnoticed to-day (says one), it will be found flourishing
			as a Banyan-grove (perhaps, alas, as a Hemlock-forest!)
			after a thousand years.</p>

			<p>&#8216;He who first shortened the labour of Copyists by
			device of <em>Movable Types</em> was disbanding hired Armies,
			and cashiering most Kings and Senates, and creating
			a whole new Democratic world: he had invented the
			Art of Printing. The first ground handful of Nitre,
			Sulphur, and Charcoal drove Monk Schwartz&#8217;s pestle
			through the ceiling: what will the last do? Achieve
			the final undisputed prostration of Force under Thought,
			of Animal courage under Spiritual. A simple invention
			it was in the old-world Grazier,&#8212;sick of lugging
			his slow Ox about the country till he got it bartered
			for corn or oil,&#8212;to take a piece of Leather, and thereon
			scratch or stamp the mere Figure of an Ox (or <i>Pecus</i>);
			put it in his pocket, and call it <i>Pecunia</i>, Money. Yet
			hereby did Barter grow Sale, the Leather Money is
			now Golden and Paper, and all miracles have been out-miracled:
			for there are Rothschilds and English
			National Debts; and whoso has sixpence is sovereign
			(to the length of sixpence) over all men; commands
			cooks to feed him, philosophers to teach him, kings
			to mount guard over him,&#8212;to the length of sixpence.&#8212;Clothes
			too, which began in foolishest love of Ornament,
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page30" name="page30"></a>30</span>what have they not become! Increased Security
			and pleasurable Heat soon followed: but what of these?
			Shame, divine Shame (<i>Schaam</i>, Modesty), as yet a
			stranger to the Anthropophagous bosom, arose there
			mysteriously under Clothes; a mystic grove-encircled
			shrine for the Holy in man. Clothes gave us individuality,
			distinctions, social polity; Clothes have made
			Men of us; they are threatening to make Clothes-screens
			of us.</p>

			<p>&#8216;But, on the whole,&#8217; continues our eloquent Professor,
			&#8216;Man is a Tool-using Animal (<i>Handthierendes
			Thier</i>). Weak in himself, and of small stature, he
			stands on a basis, at most for the flattest-soled, of some
			half-square foot, insecurely enough; has to straddle
			out his legs, lest the very wind supplant him. Feeblest
			of bipeds! Three quintals are a crushing load for him;
			the steer of the meadow tosses him aloft, like a waste
			rag. Nevertheless he can use Tools, can devise Tools:
			with these the granite mountain melts into light dust
			before him; he kneads glowing iron, as if it were soft
			paste; seas are his smooth highway, winds and fire his
			unwearying steeds. Nowhere do you find him without
			Tools; without Tools he is nothing, with Tools he is all.&#8217;</p>

			<p>Here may we not, for a moment, interrupt the stream
			of Oratory with a remark, that this Definition of the
			Tool-using Animal, appears to us, of all that Animal-sort,
			considerably the precisest and best? Man is called
			a Laughing Animal: but do not the apes also laugh, or
			attempt to do it; and is the manliest man the greatest
			and oftenest laugher? Teufelsdröckh himself, as we said,
			laughed only once. Still less do we make of that other
			French Definition of the Cooking Animal; which, indeed,
			for rigorous scientific purposes, is as good as useless.
			Can a Tartar be said to cook, when he only
			readies his steak by riding on it? Again, what Cookery
			does the Greenlander use, beyond stowing-up his
			whale-blubber, as a marmot, in the like case, might do?
			Or how would Monsieur Ude prosper among those
			Orinocco Indians, who, according to Humboldt, lodge
			in crow-nests, on the branches of trees; and, for half
			the year, have no victuals but pipe-clay, the whole
			country being under water? But, on the other hand,
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page31" name="page31"></a>31</span>show us the human being, of any period or climate,
			without his Tools: those very Caledonians, as we saw,
			had their Flint-ball, and Thong to it, such as no brute
			has or can have.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Man is a Tool-using Animal,&#8217; concludes Teufelsdröckh
			in his abrupt way; &#8216;of which truth Clothes are
			but one example: and surely if we consider the interval
			between the first wooden Dibble fashioned by man, and
			those Liverpool Steam-carriages, or the British House
			of Commons, we shall note what progress he has made.
			He digs up certain black stones from the bosom of the
			earth, and says to them, <em>Transport me and this luggage
			at the rate of five-and-thirty miles an hour</em>; and they
			do it: he collects, apparently by lot, six-hundred and
			fifty-eight miscellaneous individuals, and says to them,
			<em>Make this nation toil for us, bleed for us, hunger and
			sorrow and sin for us</em>; and they do it.&#8217;</p>

		</div>
		<div id="book_1_chapter_6" class="chapter">
			<p class="chapter_head">CHAPTER VI</p>
			<h3 class="chapter_title">APRONS</h3>

			<p><span class="first_word">One</span> of the most unsatisfactory Sections in the whole
			Volume is that on <i>Aprons</i>. What though stout old
			Gao, the Persian Blacksmith, &#8216;whose Apron, now indeed
			hidden under jewels, because raised in revolt which
			proved successful, is still the royal standard of that
			country&#8217;; what though John Knox&#8217;s Daughter, &#8216;who
			threatened Sovereign Majesty that she would catch her
			husband&#8217;s head in her Apron, rather than he should lie
			and be a bishop&#8217;; what though the Landgravine Elizabeth,
			with many other Apron worthies,&#8212;figure here?
			An idle wire-drawing spirit, sometimes even a tone of
			levity, approaching to conventional satire, is too clearly
			discernible. What, for example, are we to make of
			such sentences as the following?</p>

			<p>&#8216;Aprons are Defences; against injury to cleanliness,
			to safety, to modesty, sometimes to roguery. From the
			thin slip of notched silk (as it were, the Emblem and
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page32" name="page32"></a>32</span>beatified Ghost of an Apron), which some highest-bred
			housewife, sitting at Nürnberg Workboxes and Toyboxes,
			has gracefully fastened on; to the thick-tanned
			hide, girt round him with thongs, wherein the Builder
			builds, and at evening sticks his trowel; or to those
			jingling sheet-iron Aprons, wherein your otherwise
			half-naked Vulcans hammer and smelt in their smelt-furnace,&#8212;is
			there not range enough in the fashion and
			uses of this Vestment? How much has been concealed,
			how much has been defended in Aprons! Nay, rightly
			considered, what is your whole Military and Police
			Establishment, charged at uncalculated millions, but a
			huge scarlet-coloured, iron-fastened Apron, wherein
			Society works (uneasily enough); guarding itself from
			some soil and stithy-sparks, in this Devil&#8217;s-smithy
			(<i>Teufelsschmiede</i>) of a world? But of all Aprons the
			most puzzling to me hitherto has been the Episcopal or
			Cassock. Wherein consists the usefulness of this
			Apron? The Overseer (<i>Episcopus</i>) of Souls, I notice,
			has tucked-in the corner of it, as if his day&#8217;s work
			were done: what does he shadow forth thereby?&#8217;
			&amp;c. &amp;c.</p>

			<p>Or again, has it often been the lot of our readers to
			read such stuff as we shall now quote?</p>

			<p>&#8216;I consider those printed Paper Aprons, worn by the
			Parisian Cooks, as a new vent, though a slight one,
			for Typography; therefore as an encouragement to
			modern Literature, and deserving of approval: nor is
			it without satisfaction that I hear of a celebrated London
			Firm having in view to introduce the same fashion,
			with important extensions, in England.&#8217;&#8212;We who are
			on the spot hear of no such thing; and indeed have
			reason to be thankful that hitherto there are other vents
			for our Literature, exuberant as it is.&#8212;Teufelsdröckh
			continues: &#8216;If such supply of printed Paper should
			rise so far as to choke-up the highways and public
			thoroughfares, new means must of necessity be had
			recourse to. In a world existing by Industry, we
			grudge to employ fire as a destroying element, and not
			as a creating one. However, Heaven is omnipotent,
			and will find us an outlet. In the mean while, is it not
			beautiful to see five-million quintals of Rags picked
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page33" name="page33"></a>33</span>annually from the Laystall; and annually, after being
			macerated, hot-pressed, printed-on, and sold,&#8212;returned
			thither; filling so many hungry mouths by the
			way? Thus is the Laystall, especially with its Rags or
			Clothes-rubbish, the grand Electric Battery, and Fountain-of-motion,
			from which and to which the Social
			Activities (like vitreous and resinous Electricities) circulate,
			in larger or smaller circles, through the mighty,
			billowy, storm-tost Chaos of Life, which they keep
			alive!&#8217;&#8212;Such passages fill us, who love the man, and
			partly esteem him, with a very mixed feeling.</p>

			<p>Farther down we meet with this: &#8216;The Journalists
			are now the true Kings and Clergy: henceforth Historians,
			unless they are fools, must write not of Bourbon
			Dynasties, and Tudors and Hapsburgs; but of
			Stamped Broad-sheet Dynasties, and quite new successive
			Names, according as this or the other Able Editor,
			or Combination of Able Editors, gains the world&#8217;s ear.
			Of the British Newspaper Press, perhaps the most
			important of all, and wonderful enough in its secret
			constitution and procedure, a valuable descriptive History
			already exists, in that language, under the title of
			<i>Satan&#8217;s Invisible World Displayed</i>; which, however,
			by search in all the Weissnichtwo Libraries, I have not
			yet succeeded in procuring (<i>vermöchte nicht aufzutreiben</i>).&#8217;</p>

			<p>Thus does the good Homer not only nod, but snore.
			Thus does Teufelsdröckh, wandering in regions where
			he had little business, confound the old authentic
			Presbyterian Witchfinder with a new, spurious, imaginary
			Historian of the <i>Brittische Journalistik</i>; and so
			stumble on perhaps the most egregious blunder in
			Modern Literature!</p>

		</div>
		<div id="book_1_chapter_7" class="chapter">
			<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page34" name="page34"></a>34</span></p>

			<p class="chapter_head">CHAPTER VII</p>

			<h3 class="chapter_title">MISCELLANEOUS-HISTORICAL</h3>

			<p><span class="first_word">Happier</span> is our Professor, and more purely scientific
			and historic, when he reaches the Middle Ages in
			Europe, and down to the end of the Seventeenth Century;
			the true era of extravagance in Costume. It is
			here that the Antiquary and Student of Modes comes
			upon his richest harvest. Fantastic garbs, beggaring
			all fancy of a Teniers or a Callot, succeed each other,
			like monster devouring monster in a Dream. The
			whole too in brief authentic strokes, and touched not
			seldom with that breath of genius which makes even
			old raiment live. Indeed, so learned, precise, graphical,
			and everyway interesting have we found these Chapters,
			that it may be thrown-out as a pertinent question for
			parties concerned, Whether or not a good English
			Translation thereof might henceforth be profitably incorporated
			with Mr. Merrick&#8217;s valuable Work <i>On
			Ancient Armour</i>? Take, by way of example, the
			following sketch; as authority for which Paulinus&#8217;s
			<i>Zeitkürzende Lust</i> (ii. 678) is, with seeming confidence,
			referred to:</p>

			<p>&#8216;Did we behold the German fashionable dress of the
			Fifteenth Century, we might smile; as perhaps those
			bygone Germans, were they to rise again, and see our
			haberdashery, would cross themselves, and invoke the
			Virgin. But happily no bygone German, or man, rises
			again; thus the Present is not needlessly trammelled
			with the Past; and only grows out of it, like a Tree,
			whose roots are not intertangled with its branches, but
			lie peaceably underground. Nay it is very mournful,
			yet not useless, to see and know, how the Greatest and
			Dearest, in a short while, would find his place quite
			filled-up here, and no room for him; the very Napoleon,
			the very Byron, in some seven years, has become obsolete,
			and were now a foreigner to his Europe. Thus
			is the Law of Progress secured; and in Clothes, as in
			all other external things whatsoever, no fashion will
			continue.</p>

			<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page35" name="page35"></a>35</span>&#8216;Of the military classes in those old times, whose
			buff-belts, complicated chains and gorgets, huge churn-boots,
			and other riding and fighting gear have been
			bepainted in modern Romance, till the whole has
			acquired somewhat of a sign-post character,&#8212;I shall
			here say nothing: the civil and pacific classes, less
			touched upon, are wonderful enough for us.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Rich men, I find, have <i>Teusinke</i>&#8217; (a perhaps untranslateable
			article); &#8216;also a silver girdle, whereat
			hang little bells; so that when a man walks, it is with
			continual jingling. Some few, of musical turn, have a
			whole chime of bells (<i>Glockenspiel</i>) fastened there;
			which, especially in sudden whirls, and the other accidents
			of walking, has a grateful effect. Observe too
			how fond they are of peaks, and Gothic-arch intersections.
			The male world wears peaked caps, an ell long,
			which hang bobbing over the side (<i>schief</i>): their shoes
			are peaked in front, also to the length of an ell, and
			laced on the side with tags; even the wooden shoes
			have their ell-long noses: some also clap bells on the
			peak. Further, according to my authority, the men
			have breeches without seat (<i>ohne Gesäss</i>): these they
			fasten peakwise to their shirts; and the long round
			doublet must overlap them.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Rich maidens, again, flit abroad in gowns scolloped
			out behind and before, so that back and breast are
			almost bare. Wives of quality, on the other hand, have
			train-gowns four or five ells in length; which trains
			there are boys to carry. Brave Cleopatras, sailing in
			their silk-cloth Galley, with a Cupid for steersman!
			Consider their welts, a handbreadth thick, which waver
			round them by way of hem; the long flood of silver
			buttons, or rather silver shells, from throat to shoe,
			wherewith these same welt-gowns are buttoned. The
			maidens have bound silver snoods about their hair, with
			gold spangles, and pendent flames (<i>Flammen</i>), that is,
			sparkling hair-drops: but of their mother&#8217;s headgear
			who shall speak? Neither in love of grace is comfort
			forgotten. In winter weather you behold the whole fair
			creation (that can afford it) in long mantles, with skirts
			wide below, and, for hem, not one but two sufficient
			hand-broad welts; all ending atop in a thick well-starched
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page36" name="page36"></a>36</span>Ruff, some twenty inches broad: these are
			their Ruff-mantles (<i>Kragenmäntel</i>).</p>

			<p>&#8216;As yet among the womankind hoop-petticoats are
			not; but the men have doublets of fustian, under which
			lie multiple ruffs of cloth, pasted together with batter
			(<i>mit Teig zusammengekleistert</i>), which create protuberance
			enough. Thus do the two sexes vie with each
			other in the art of Decoration; and as usual the stronger
			carries it.&#8217;</p>

			<p>Our Professor, whether he hath humour himself or
			not, manifests a certain feeling of the Ludicrous, a sly
			observance of it, which, could emotion of any kind be
			confidently predicated of so still a man, we might call
			a real love. None of those bell-girdles, bushel-breeches,
			cornuted shoes, or other the like phenomena, of which
			the History of Dress offers so many, escape him: more
			especially the mischances, or striking adventures, incident
			to the wearers of such, are noticed with due
			fidelity. Sir Walter Raleigh&#8217;s fine mantle, which he
			spread in the mud under Queen Elizabeth&#8217;s feet, appears
			to provoke little enthusiasm in him; he merely
			asks, Whether at that period the Maiden Queen &#8216;was
			red-painted on the nose, and white-painted on the
			cheeks, as her tire-women, when from spleen and
			wrinkles she would no longer look in any glass, were
			wont to serve her?&#8217; We can answer that Sir Walter
			knew well what he was doing, and had the Maiden
			Queen been stuffed parchment dyed in verdigris, would
			have done the same.</p>

			<p>Thus too, treating of those enormous habiliments,
			that were not only slashed and galooned, but artificially
			swollen-out on the broader parts of the body, by
			introduction of Bran,&#8212;our Professor fails not to comment
			on that luckless Courtier, who having seated himself
			on a chair with some projecting nail on it, and
			therefrom rising, to pay his <i>devoir</i> on the entrance of
			Majesty, instantaneously emitted several pecks of dry
			wheat-dust: and stood there diminished to a spindle,
			his galoons and slashes dangling sorrowful and flabby
			round him. Whereupon the Professor publishes this
			reflection:</p>

			<p>&#8216;By what strange chances do we live in History?
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page37" name="page37"></a>37</span>Erostratus by a torch; Milo by a bullock; Henry
			Darnley, an unfledged booby and bustard, by his limbs;
			most Kings and Queens by being born under such and
			such a bed-tester; Boileau Despréaux (according to
			Helvetius) by the peck of a turkey; and this ill-starred
			individual by a rent in his breeches,&#8212;for no Memoirist
			of Kaiser Otto&#8217;s Court omits him. Vain was the prayer
			of Themistocles for a talent of Forgetting: my Friends,
			yield cheerfully to Destiny, and read since it is written.&#8217;&#8212;Has
			Teufelsdröckh to be put in mind that, nearly
			related to the impossible talent of Forgetting, stands
			that talent of Silence, which even travelling Englishmen
			manifest?</p>

			<p>&#8216;The simplest costume,&#8217; observes our Professor,
			&#8216;which I anywhere find alluded to in History, is that
			used as regimental, by Bolivar&#8217;s Cavalry, in the late
			Columbian wars. A square Blanket, twelve feet in
			diagonal, is provided (some were wont to cut-off the
			corners, and make it circular): in the centre a slit is
			effected eighteen inches long; through this the mother-naked
			Trooper introduces his head and neck: and so
			rides shielded from all weather, and in battle from many
			strokes (for he rolls it about his left arm); and not only
			dressed, but harnessed and draperied.&#8217;</p>

			<p>With which picture of a State of Nature, affecting
			by its singularity, and Old-Roman contempt of the
			superfluous, we shall quit this part of our subject.</p>

		</div>
		<div id="book_1_chapter_8" class="chapter">
			<p class="chapter_head">CHAPTER VIII</p>

			<h3 class="chapter_title">THE WORLD OUT OF CLOTHES</h3>

			<p><span class="first_word">If</span> in the Descriptive-Historical portion of this
			Volume, Teufelsdröckh, discussing merely the <i>Werden</i>
			(Origin and successive Improvement) of Clothes, has
			astonished many a reader, much more will he in the
			Speculative-Philosophical portion, which treats of their
			<i>Wirken</i>, or Influences. It is here that the present
			Editor first feels the pressure of his task; for here
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page38" name="page38"></a>38</span>properly the higher and new Philosophy of Clothes
			commences: an untried, almost inconceivable region,
			or chaos; in venturing upon which, how difficult, yet
			how unspeakably important is it to know what course,
			of survey and conquest, is the true one; where the
			footing is firm substance and will bear us, where it is
			hollow, or mere cloud, and may engulf us! Teufelsdröckh
			undertakes no less than to expound the moral,
			political, even religious Influences of Clothes; he undertakes
			to make manifest, in its thousandfold bearings,
			this grand Proposition, that Man&#8217;s earthly interests
			&#8216;are all hooked and buttoned together, and held up,
			by Clothes.&#8217; He says in so many words, &#8216;Society
			is founded upon Cloth&#8217;; and again, &#8216;Society sails
			through the Infinitude on Cloth, as on a Faust&#8217;s Mantle,
			or rather like the Sheet of clean and unclean beasts in
			the Apostle&#8217;s Dream; and without such Sheet or
			Mantle, would sink to endless depths, or mount to inane
			limboes, and in either case be no more.&#8217;</p>

			<p>By what chains, or indeed infinitely complected tissues,
			of Meditation this grand Theorem is here unfolded, and
			innumerable practical Corollaries are drawn therefrom,
			it were perhaps a mad ambition to attempt exhibiting.
			Our Professor&#8217;s method is not, in any case, that of
			common school Logic, where the truths all stand in a
			row, each holding by the skirts of the other; but at
			best that of practical Reason, proceeding by large Intuition
			over whole systematic groups and kingdoms;
			whereby, we might say, a noble complexity, almost like
			that of Nature, reigns in his Philosophy, or spiritual
			Picture of Nature: a mighty maze, yet, as faith
			whispers, not without a plan. Nay we complained
			above, that a certain ignoble complexity, what we must
			call mere confusion, was also discernible. Often, also,
			we have to exclaim: Would to Heaven those same
			Biographical Documents were come! For it seems as
			if the demonstration lay much in the Author&#8217;s individuality;
			as if it were not Argument that had taught him,
			but Experience. At present it is only in local glimpses,
			and by significant fragments, picked often at wide-enough
			intervals from the original Volume, and carefully
			collated, that we can hope to impart some outline
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page39" name="page39"></a>39</span>or foreshadow of this Doctrine. Readers of any intelligence
			are once more invited to favour us with their
			most concentrated attention: let these, after intense
			consideration, and not till then, pronounce, Whether on
			the utmost verge of our actual horizon there is not a
			looming as of Land; a promise of new Fortunate
			Islands, perhaps whole undiscovered Americas, for such
			as have canvas to sail thither?&#8212;As exordium to the
			whole, stand here the following long citation:</p>

			<p>&#8216;With men of a speculative turn,&#8217; writes Teufelsdröckh,
			&#8216;there come seasons, meditative, sweet, yet
			awful hours, when in wonder and fear you ask yourself
			that unanswerable question: Who am <em>I</em>; the thing
			that can say &#8220;I&#8221; (<i>das Wesen das sich <span class="special_emphasis">Ich</span> nennt</i>)? The
			world, with its loud trafficking, retires into the distance;
			and, through the paper-hangings, and stone-walls, and
			thick-plied tissues of Commerce and Polity, and all the
			living and lifeless integuments (of Society and a Body),
			wherewith your Existence sits surrounded,&#8212;the sight
			reaches forth into the void Deep, and you are alone with
			the Universe, and silently commune with it, as one
			mysterious Presence with another.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Who am I; what is this <span class="special_emphasis">Me</span>? A Voice, a Motion,
			an Appearance;&#8212;some embodied, visualised Idea in the
			Eternal Mind? <i>Cogito, ergo sum.</i> Alas, poor Cogitator,
			this takes us but a little way. Sure enough, I
			am; and lately was not: but Whence? How? Whereto?
			The answer lies around, written in all colours and
			motions, uttered in all tones of jubilee and wail, in
			thousand-figured, thousand-voiced, harmonious Nature:
			but where is the cunning eye and ear to whom that
			God-written Apocalypse will yield articulate meaning?
			We sit as in a boundless Phantasmagoria and Dream-grotto;
			boundless, for the faintest star, the remotest
			century, lies not even nearer the verge thereof: sounds
			and many-coloured visions flit round our sense; but
			Him, the Unslumbering, whose work both Dream and
			Dreamer are, we see not; except in rare half-waking
			moments, suspect not. Creation, says one, lies before
			us, like a glorious Rainbow; but the Sun that made
			it lies behind us, hidden from us. Then, in that strange
			Dream, how we clutch at shadows as if they were substances;
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page40" name="page40"></a>40</span>and sleep deepest while fancying ourselves
			most awake! Which of your Philosophical Systems is
			other than a dream-theorem; a net quotient, confidently
			given out, where divisor and dividend are both
			unknown? What are all your national Wars, with
			their Moscow Retreats, and sanguinary hate-filled Revolutions,
			but the Somnambulism of uneasy Sleepers?
			This Dreaming, this Somnambulism is what we on
			Earth call Life; wherein the most indeed undoubtingly
			wander, as if they knew right hand from left; yet they
			only are wise who know that they know nothing.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Pity that all Metaphysics had hitherto proved so
			inexpressibly unproductive! The secret of Man&#8217;s Being
			is still like the Sphinx&#8217;s secret: a riddle that he cannot
			rede; and for ignorance of which he suffers death, the
			worst death, a spiritual. What are your Axioms, and
			Categories, and Systems, and Aphorisms? Words,
			words. High Air-castles are cunningly built of Words,
			the Words well bedded also in good Logic-mortar,
			wherein, however, no Knowledge will come to lodge.
			<em>The whole is greater than the part</em>: how exceedingly
			true! <em>Nature abhors a vacuum</em>: how exceedingly false
			and calumnious! Again, <i>Nothing can act but where it
			is</i>: with all my heart; only, <span class="special_emphasis_smaller">WHERE</span> is it? Be not the
			slave of Words: is not the Distant, the Dead, while I
			love it, and long for it, and mourn for it, Here, in the
			genuine sense, as truly as the floor I stand on? But that
			same <span class="special_emphasis">Where</span>, with its brother <span class="special_emphasis">When</span>, are from the first
			the master-colours of our Dream-grotto; say rather, the
			Canvas (the warp and woof thereof) whereon all our
			Dreams and Life-visions are painted! Nevertheless,
			has not a deeper meditation taught certain of every
			climate and age, that the <span class="special_emphasis">Where</span> and <span class="special_emphasis">When</span>, so mysteriously
			inseparable from all our thoughts, are but
			superficial terrestrial adhesions to thought; that the
			Seer may discern them where they mount up out of the
			celestial <span class="special_emphasis">Everywhere</span> and <span class="special_emphasis">Forever</span>: have not all
			nations conceived their God as Omnipresent and
			Eternal; as existing in a universal <span class="special_emphasis">Here</span>, an everlasting
			<span class="special_emphasis">Now</span>? Think well, thou too wilt find that Space is
			but a mode of our human Sense, so likewise Time;
			there <em>is</em> no Space and no Time: <span class="special_emphasis">We</span> are&#8212;we know
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page41" name="page41"></a>41</span>not what;&#8212;light-sparkles floating in the æther of
			Deity!</p>

			<p>&#8216;So that this so solid-seeming World, after all, were
			but an air-image, our <span class="special_emphasis">Me</span> the only reality: and Nature,
			with its thousandfold production and destruction, but
			the reflex of our own inward Force, the &#8220;phantasy of
			our Dream&#8221;; or what the Earth-Spirit in <i>Faust</i> names
			it, <em>the living visible Garment of God</em>:</p>

			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>&#8220;In Being&#8217;s floods, in Action&#8217;s storm,</p>
					<p>I walk and work, above, beneath,</p>
					<p>Work and weave in endless motion!</p>
					<p class="i6">Birth and Death,</p>
					<p class="i6">An infinite ocean;</p>
					<p class="i6">A seizing and giving</p>
					<p class="i6">The fire of Living:</p>
					<p>&#8217;Tis thus at the roaring Loom of Time I ply,</p>
					<p>And weave for God the Garment thou seest Him by.&#8221;</p>
				</div>
			</div>

			<p class="continued">Of twenty millions that have read and spouted this
			thunder-speech of the <i>Erdgeist</i>, are there yet twenty
			units of us that have learned the meaning thereof?</p>

			<p>&#8216;It was in some such mood, when wearied and fordone
			with these high speculations, that I first came upon
			the question of Clothes. Strange enough, it strikes
			me, is this same fact of there being Tailors and Tailored.
			The Horse I ride has his own whole fell: strip him of
			the girths and flaps and extraneous tags I have fastened
			round him, and the noble creature is his own sempster
			and weaver and spinner; nay his own bootmaker,
			jeweller, and man-milliner; he bounds free through
			the valleys, with a perennial rain-proof court-suit on
			his body; wherein warmth and easiness of fit have
			reached perfection; nay, the graces also have been
			considered, and frills and fringes, with gay variety of
			colour, featly appended, and ever in the right place, are
			not wanting. While I&#8212;good Heaven!&#8212;have thatched
			myself over with the dead fleeces of sheep, the bark
			of vegetables, the entrails of worms, the hides of oxen
			or seals, the felt of furred beasts; and walk abroad a
			moving Rag-screen, overheaped with shreds and tatters
			raked from the Charnel-house of Nature, where they
			would have rotted, to rot on me more slowly! Day
			after day, I must thatch myself anew; day after day,
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page42" name="page42"></a>42</span>this despicable thatch must lose some film of its thickness;
			some film of it, frayed away by tear and wear,
			must be brushed-off into the Ashpit, into the Laystall;
			till by degrees the whole has been brushed thither, and
			I, the dust-making, patent Rag-grinder, get new
			material to grind down. O subter-brutish! vile! most
			vile! For have not I too a compact all-enclosing Skin,
			whiter or dingier? Am I a botched mass of tailors&#8217;
			and cobblers&#8217; shreds, then; or a tightly-articulated,
			homogeneous little Figure, automatic, nay alive?</p>

			<p>&#8216;Strange enough how creatures of the human-kind
			shut their eyes to plainest facts; and by the mere inertia
			of Oblivion and Stupidity, live at ease in the midst of
			Wonders and Terrors. But indeed man is, and was
			always, a blockhead and dullard; much readier to feel
			and digest, than to think and consider. Prejudice,
			which he pretends to hate, is his absolute lawgiver;
			mere use-and-wont everywhere leads him by the nose;
			thus let but a Rising of the Sun, let but a Creation of
			the World happen <em>twice</em>, and it ceases to be marvellous,
			to be noteworthy, or noticeable. Perhaps not once in
			a lifetime does it occur to your ordinary biped, of any
			country or generation, be he gold-mantled Prince or
			russet-jerkined Peasant, that his Vestments and his
			Self are not one and indivisible; that <em>he</em> is naked, without
			vestments, till he buy or steal such, and by forethought
			sew and button them.</p>

			<p>&#8216;For my own part, these considerations, of our
			Clothes-thatch, and how, reaching inwards even to our
			heart of hearts, it tailorises and demoralises us, fill me
			with a certain horror at myself and mankind; almost
			as one feels at those Dutch Cows, which, during the
			wet season, you see grazing deliberately with jackets
			and petticoats (of striped sacking), in the meadows of
			Gouda. Nevertheless there is something great in the
			moment when a man first strips himself of adventitious
			wrappages; and sees indeed that he is naked, and, as
			Swift has it, &#8220;a forked straddling animal with bandy
			legs&#8221;; yet also a Spirit, and unutterable Mystery of
			Mysteries.&#8217;</p>

		</div>
		<div id="book_1_chapter_9" class="chapter">
			<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page43" name="page43"></a>43</span></p>
			<p class="chapter_head">CHAPTER IX</p>
			<h3 class="chapter_title">ADAMITISM</h3>

			<p><span class="first_word">Let</span> no courteous reader take offence at the opinions
			broached in the conclusion of the last Chapter. The
			Editor himself, on first glancing over that singular
			passage, was inclined to exclaim: What, have we got
			not only a Sansculottist, but an enemy to Clothes in
			the abstract? A new Adamite, in this century, which
			flatters itself that it is the Nineteenth, and destructive
			both to Superstition and Enthusiasm?</p>

			<p>Consider, thou foolish Teufelsdröckh, what benefits
			unspeakable all ages and sexes derive from Clothes.
			For example, when thou thyself, a watery, pulpy, slobbery
			freshman and new-comer in this Planet, sattest
			muling and puking in thy nurse&#8217;s arms; sucking thy
			coral, and looking forth into the world in the blankest
			manner, what hadst thou been without thy blankets,
			and bibs, and other nameless hulls? A terror to thyself
			and mankind! Or hast thou forgotten the day when
			thou first receivedst breeches, and thy long clothes became
			short? The village where thou livedst was all
			apprised of the fact; and neighbour after neighbour
			kissed thy pudding-cheek, and gave thee, as handsel,
			silver or copper coins, on that the first gala-day of thy
			existence. Again, wert not thou, at one period of life,
			a Buck, or Blood, or Macaroni, or Incroyable, or Dandy,
			or by whatever name, according to year and place,
			such phenomenon is distinguished? In that one word
			lie included mysterious volumes. Nay, now when the
			reign of folly is over, or altered, and thy clothes are
			not for triumph but for defence, hast thou always worn
			them perforce, and as a consequence of Man&#8217;s Fall;
			never rejoiced in them as in a warm movable House, a
			Body round thy Body, wherein that strange <span class="special_emphasis">Thee</span> of
			thine sat snug, defying all variations of Climate? Girt
			with thick double-milled kerseys; half-buried under
			shawls and broad-brims, and overalls and mud-boots,
			thy very fingers cased in doeskin and mittens, thou hast
			bestrode that &#8216;Horse I ride&#8217;; and, though it were in
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page44" name="page44"></a>44</span>wild winter, dashed through the world, glorying in it
			as if thou wert its lord. In vain did the sleet beat
			round thy temples; it lighted only on thy impenetrable,
			felted or woven, case of wool. In vain did the winds
			howl,&#8212;forests sounding and creaking, deep calling unto
			deep,&#8212;and the storms heap themselves together into
			one huge Arctic whirlpool: thou flewest through the
			middle thereof, striking fire from the highway; wild
			music hummed in thy ears, thou too wert as a &#8216;sailor
			of the air&#8217;; the wreck of matter and the crash of
			worlds was thy element and propitiously wafting tide.
			Without Clothes, without bit or saddle, what hadst
			thou been; what had thy fleet quadruped been?&#8212;Nature
			is good, but she is not the best: here truly
			was the victory of Art over Nature. A thunderbolt
			indeed might have pierced thee; all short of this thou
			couldst defy.</p>

			<p>Or, cries the courteous reader, has your Teufelsdröckh
			forgotten what he said lately about &#8216;Aboriginal
			Savages,&#8217; and their &#8216;condition miserable indeed&#8217;?
			Would he have all this unsaid; and us betake ourselves
			again to the &#8216;matted cloak,&#8217; and go sheeted in a &#8216;thick
			natural fell&#8217;?</p>

			<p>Nowise, courteous reader! The Professor knows
			full well what he is saying; and both thou and we, in
			our haste, do him wrong. If Clothes, in these times,
			&#8216;so tailorise and demoralise us,&#8217; have they no redeeming
			value; can they not be altered to serve better;
			must they of necessity be thrown to the dogs? The
			truth is, Teufelsdröckh, though a Sansculottist, is no
			Adamite; and much perhaps as he might wish to go
			forth before this degenerate age &#8216;as a Sign,&#8217; would
			nowise wish to do it, as those old Adamites did, in
			a state of Nakedness. The utility of Clothes is altogether
			apparent to him: nay perhaps he has an insight
			into their more recondite, and almost mystic qualities,
			what we might call the omnipotent virtue of Clothes,
			such as was never before vouchsafed to any man. For
			example:</p>

			<p>&#8216;You see two individuals,&#8217; he writes, &#8216;one dressed
			in fine Red, the other in coarse threadbare Blue: Red
			says to Blue, &#8220;Be hanged and anatomised&#8221;; Blue hears
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page45" name="page45"></a>45</span>with a shudder, and (O wonder of wonders!) marches
			sorrowfully to the gallows; is there noosed-up, vibrates
			his hour, and the surgeons dissect him, and fit his bones
			into a skeleton for medical purposes. How is this; or
			what make ye of your <em>Nothing can act but where it is</em>?
			Red has no physical hold of Blue, no <em>clutch</em> of him, is
			nowise in <em>contact</em> with him: neither are those ministering
			Sheriffs and Lord-Lieutenants and Hangmen and
			Tipstaves so related to commanding Red, that he can
			tug them hither and thither; but each stands distinct
			within his own skin. Nevertheless, as it is spoken, so
			is it done: the articulated Word sets all hands in
			Action; and Rope and Improved-drop perform their
			work.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Thinking reader, the reason seems to me twofold:
			First, that <em>Man is a Spirit</em>, and bound by invisible bonds
			to <em>All Men</em>; secondly, that <em>he wears Clothes</em>, which are
			the visible emblems of that fact. Has not your Red
			hanging-individual a horsehair wig, squirrel-skins, and
			a plush-gown; whereby all mortals know that he is a
			<span class="special_emphasis">Judge</span>?&#8212;Society, which the more I think of it astonishes
			me the more, is founded upon Cloth.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Often in my atrabiliar-moods, when I read of pompous
			ceremonials, Frankfort Coronations, Royal Drawing-rooms,
			Levees, Couchees; and how the ushers and
			macers and pursuivants are all in waiting; how Duke
			this is presented by Archduke that, and Colonel A by
			General B, and innumerable Bishops, Admirals, and
			miscellaneous Functionaries, are advancing gallantly
			to the Anointed Presence; and I strive, in my remote
			privacy, to form a clear picture of that solemnity,&#8212;on
			a sudden, as by some enchanter&#8217;s wand, the&#8212;shall I
			speak it?&#8212;the Clothes fly-off the whole dramatic corps;
			and Dukes, Grandees, Bishops, Generals, Anointed
			Presence itself, every mother&#8217;s son of them, stand
			straddling there, not a shirt on them; and I know not
			whether to laugh or weep. This physical or psychical
			infirmity, in which perhaps I am not singular, I have,
			after hesitation, thought right to publish, for the solace
			of those afflicted with the like.&#8217;</p>

			<p>Would to Heaven, say we, thou hadst thought right
			to keep it secret! Who is there now that can read the
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page46" name="page46"></a>46</span>five columns of Presentations in his Morning Newspaper
			without a shudder? Hypochondriac men, and all men
			are to a certain extent hypochondriac, should be more
			gently treated. With what readiness our fancy, in this
			shattered state of the nerves, follows out the consequences
			which Teufelsdröckh, with a devilish coolness,
			goes on to draw:</p>

			<p>&#8216;What would Majesty do, could such an accident
			befall in reality; should the buttons all simultaneously
			start, and the solid wool evaporate, in very Deed, as
			here in Dream? <i>Ach Gott!</i> How each skulks into the
			nearest hiding-place; their high State Tragedy (<i>Haupt- und
			Staats-Action</i>) becomes a Pickleherring-Farce to
			weep at, which is the worst kind of Farce; <em>the tables</em>
			(according to Horace), and with them, the whole fabric
			of Government, Legislation, Property, Police, and
			Civilised Society, <em>are dissolved</em>, in wails and howls.&#8217;</p>

			<p>Lives the man that can figure a naked Duke of
			Windlestraw addressing a naked House of Lords?
			Imagination, choked as in mephitic air, recoils on itself,
			and will not forward with the picture. The Woolsack,
			the Ministerial, the Opposition Benches&#8212;<i>infandum!
			infandum!</i> And yet why is the thing impossible?
			Was not every soul, or rather every body, of these
			Guardians of our Liberties, naked, or nearly so, last
			night; &#8216;a forked Radish with a head fantastically
			carved&#8217;? And why might he not, did our stern fate
			so order it, walk out to St Stephen&#8217;s, as well as into
			bed, in that no-fashion; and there, with other similar
			Radishes, hold a Bed of Justice? &#8216;Solace of those
			afflicted with the like!&#8217; Unhappy Teufelsdröckh, had
			man ever such a &#8216;physical or psychical infirmity&#8217;
			before? And now how many, perhaps, may thy unparalleled
			confession (which we, even to the sounder
			British world, and goaded-on by Critical and Biographical
			duty, grudge to re-impart) incurably infect
			therewith! Art thou the malignest of Sansculottists,
			or only the maddest?</p>

			<p>&#8216;It will remain to be examined,&#8217; adds the inexorable
			Teufelsdröckh, &#8216;in how far the <span class="special_emphasis">Scarecrow</span>, as a
			Clothed Person, is not also entitled to benefit of clergy,
			and English trial by jury: nay perhaps, considering his
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page47" name="page47"></a>47</span>high function (for is not he too a Defender of Property,
			and Sovereign armed with the <em>terrors</em> of the Law?), to
			a certain royal Immunity and Inviolability; which, however,
			misers and the meaner class of persons are not
			always voluntarily disposed to grant him.&#8217; * * *</p>

			<p>* * * &#8216;O my Friends, we are (in Yorick Sterne&#8217;s
			words) but as &#8220;turkeys driven with a stick and red
			clout, to the market&#8221;: or if some drivers, as they do
			in Norfolk, take a dried bladder and put peas in it, the
			rattle thereof terrifies the boldest!&#8217;</p>

		</div>
		<div id="book_1_chapter_10" class="chapter">
			<p class="chapter_head">CHAPTER X</p>
			<h3 class="chapter_title">PURE REASON</h3>

			<p><span class="first_word">It</span> must now be apparent enough that our Professor,
			as above hinted, is a speculative Radical, and of the
			very darkest tinge; acknowledging, for most part, in
			the solemnities and paraphernalia of civilised Life,
			which we make so much of, nothing but so many Cloth-rags,
			turkey-poles, and &#8216;bladders with dried peas.&#8217;
			To linger among such speculations, longer than mere
			Science requires, a discerning public can have no wish.
			For our purposes the simple fact that such a <i>Naked
			World</i> is possible, nay actually exists (under the Clothed
			one), will be sufficient. Much, therefore, we omit about
			&#8216;Kings wrestling naked on the green with Carmen,&#8217;
			and the Kings being thrown: &#8216;dissect them with
			scalpels,&#8217; says Teufelsdröckh; &#8216;the same viscera,
			tissues, livers, lights, and other life-tackle are there:
			examine their spiritual mechanism; the same great
			Need, great Greed, and little Faculty; nay ten to one
			but the Carman, who understands draught-cattle, the
			rimming of wheels, something of the laws of unstable
			and stable equilibrium, with other branches of wagon-science,
			and has actually put forth his hand and operated
			on Nature, is the more cunningly gifted of the two.
			Whence, then, their so unspeakable difference? From
			Clothes.&#8217; Much also we shall omit about confusion of
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page48" name="page48"></a>48</span>Ranks, and Joan and My Lady, and how it would be
			everywhere &#8216;Hail fellow well met,&#8217; and Chaos were
			come again: all which to any one that has once fairly
			pictured-out the grand mother-idea, <i>Society in a state
			of nakedness</i>, will spontaneously suggest itself. Should
			some sceptical individual still entertain doubts whether
			in a world without Clothes, the smallest Politeness,
			Polity, or even Police, could exist, let him turn to the
			original Volume, and view there the boundless Serbonian
			Bog of Sansculottism, stretching sour and pestilential:
			over which we have lightly flown; where not
			only whole armies but whole nations might sink! If
			indeed the following argument, in its brief riveting emphasis,
			be not of itself incontrovertible and final:</p>

			<p>&#8216;Are we Opossums; have we natural Pouches, like
			the Kangaroo? Or how, without Clothes, could we
			possess the master-organ, soul&#8217;s seat, and true pineal
			gland of the Body Social: I mean, a <span class="special_emphasis">Purse</span>?&#8217;</p>

			<p>Nevertheless, it is impossible to hate Professor Teufelsdröckh;
			at worst, one knows not whether to hate
			or to love him. For though, in looking at the fair
			tapestry of human Life, with its royal and even sacred
			figures, he dwells not on the obverse alone, but here
			chiefly on the reverse; and indeed turns out the rough
			seams, tatters, and manifold thrums of that unsightly
			wrong-side, with an almost diabolic patience and indifference,
			which must have sunk him in the estimation
			of most readers,&#8212;there is that within which unspeakably
			distinguishes him from all other past and present Sansculottists.
			The grand unparalleled peculiarity of Teufelsdröckh
			is, that with all this Descendentalism, he
			combines a Transcendentalism, no less superlative;
			whereby if on the one hand he degrade man below most
			animals, except those jacketed Gouda Cows, he, on the
			other, exalts him beyond the visible Heavens, almost
			to an equality with the Gods.</p>

			<p>&#8216;To the eye of vulgar Logic,&#8217; says he, &#8216;what is
			man? An omnivorous Biped that wears Breeches. To
			the eye of Pure Reason what is he? A Soul, a Spirit,
			and divine Apparition. Round his mysterious <span class="special_emphasis">Me</span>,
			there lies, under all those wool-rags, a Garment of
			Flesh (or of Senses), contextured in the Loom of
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page49" name="page49"></a>49</span>Heaven; whereby he is revealed to his like, and dwells
			with them in <span class="special_emphasis">Union</span> and <span class="special_emphasis">Division</span>; and sees and fashions
			for himself a Universe, with azure Starry Spaces, and
			long Thousands of Years. Deep-hidden is he under
			that strange Garment; amid Sounds and Colours and
			Forms, as it were, swathed-in, and inextricably over-shrouded:
			yet it is sky-woven, and worthy of a God.
			Stands he not thereby in the centre of Immensities, in
			the conflux of Eternities? He feels; power has been
			given him to know, to believe; nay does not the spirit
			of Love, free in its celestial primeval brightness, even
			here, though but for moments, look through? Well
			said Saint Chrysostom, with his lips of gold, &#8220;the true
			<span class="special_emphasis">Shekinah</span> is Man&#8221;: where else is the <span class="special_emphasis">God&#8217;s-Presence</span>
			manifested not to our eyes only, but to our hearts, as
			in our fellow-man?&#8217;</p>

			<p>In such passages, unhappily too rare, the high
			Platonic Mysticism of our Author, which is perhaps
			the fundamental element of his nature, bursts forth, as
			it were, in full flood: and, through all the vapour and
			tarnish of what is often so perverse, so mean in his
			exterior and environment, we seem to look into a whole
			inward Sea of Light and Love;&#8212;though, alas, the grim
			coppery clouds soon roll together again, and hide it from
			view.</p>

			<p>Such tendency to Mysticism is everywhere traceable
			in this man; and indeed, to attentive readers, must
			have been long ago apparent. Nothing that he sees
			but has more than a common meaning, but has two
			meanings: thus, if in the highest Imperial Sceptre and
			Charlemagne-Mantle, as well as in the poorest Ox-goad
			and Gipsy-Blanket, he finds Prose, Decay, Contemptibility;
			there is in each sort Poetry also, and a reverend
			Worth. For Matter, were it never so despicable, is
			Spirit, the manifestation of Spirit: were it never so
			honourable, can it be more? The thing Visible, nay
			the thing Imagined, the thing in any way conceived as
			Visible, what is it but a Garment, a Clothing of the
			higher, celestial Invisible, &#8216;unimaginable, formless,
			dark with excess of bright&#8217;? Under which point of
			view the following passage, so strange in purport, so
			strange in phrase, seems characteristic enough:</p>

			<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page50" name="page50"></a>50</span>&#8216;The beginning of all Wisdom is to look fixedly on
			Clothes, or even with armed eyesight, till they become
			<em>transparent</em>. &#8220;The Philosopher,&#8221; says the wisest of this
			age, &#8220;must station himself in the middle&#8221;: how true!
			The Philosopher is he to whom the Highest has descended,
			and the Lowest has mounted up; who is the
			equal and kindly brother of all.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Shall we tremble before clothwebs and cobwebs,
			whether woven in Arkwright looms, or by the silent
			Arachnes that weave unrestingly in our imagination?
			Or, on the other hand, what is there that we cannot
			love; since all was created by God?</p>

			<p>&#8216;Happy he who can look through the Clothes of a
			Man (the woollen, and fleshly, and official Bank-paper
			and State-paper Clothes) into the Man himself; and
			discern, it may be, in this or the other Dread Potentate,
			a more or less incompetent Digestive-apparatus; yet
			also an inscrutable venerable Mystery, in the meanest
			Tinker that sees with eyes!&#8217;</p>

			<p>For the rest, as is natural to a man of this kind, he
			deals much in the feeling of Wonder; insists on the
			necessity and high worth of universal Wonder; which
			he holds to be the only reasonable temper for the denizen
			of so singular a Planet as ours. &#8216;Wonder,&#8217; says he,
			&#8216;is the basis of Worship: the reign of wonder is perennial,
			indestructible in Man; only at certain stages
			(as the present), it is, for some short season, a reign
			<i>in partibus infidelium</i>.&#8217; That progress of Science,
			which is to destroy Wonder, and in its stead substitute
			Mensuration and Numeration, finds small favour with
			Teufelsdröckh, much as he otherwise venerates these
			two latter processes.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Shall your Science,&#8217; exclaims he, &#8216;proceed in the
			small chink-lighted, or even oil-lighted, underground
			workshop of Logic alone; and man&#8217;s mind become an
			Arithmetical Mill, whereof Memory is the Hopper, and
			mere Tables of Sines and Tangents, Codification, and
			Treatises of what you call Political Economy, are the
			Meal? And what is that Science, which the scientific
			head alone, were it screwed off, and (like the Doctor&#8217;s
			in the Arabian Tale) set in a basin to keep it alive, could
			prosecute without shadow of a heart,&#8212;but one other
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page51" name="page51"></a>51</span>of the mechanical and menial handicrafts, for which the
			Scientific Head (having a Soul in it) is too noble an
			organ? I mean that Thought without Reverence is
			barren, perhaps poisonous; at best, dies like cookery
			with the day that called it forth; does not live, like
			sowing, in successive tilths and wider-spreading harvests,
			bringing food and plenteous increase to all Time.&#8217;</p>

			<p>In such wise does Teufelsdröckh deal hits, harder or
			softer, according to ability; yet ever, as we would fain
			persuade ourselves, with charitable intent. Above all,
			that class of &#8216;Logic-choppers, and treble-pipe Scoffers,
			and professed Enemies to Wonder; who, in these days,
			so numerously patrol as night-constables about the
			Mechanics&#8217; Institute of Science, and cackle, like true
			Old-Roman geese and goslings round their Capitol, on
			any alarm, or on none; nay who often, as illuminated
			Sceptics, walk abroad into peaceable society, in full
			day-light, with rattle and lantern, and insist on guiding
			you and guarding you therewith, though the Sun is
			shining, and the street populous with mere justice-loving
			men&#8217;: that whole class is inexpressibly wearisome
			to him. Hear with what uncommon animation he
			perorates:</p>

			<p>&#8216;The man who cannot wonder, who does not habitually
			wonder (and worship) were he President of innumerable
			Royal Societies, and carried the whole
			<i>Mécanique Céleste</i> and <i>Hegel&#8217;s Philosophy</i>, and the
			epitome of all Laboratories and Observatories with their
			results, in his single head,&#8212;is but a Pair of Spectacles
			behind which there is no Eye. Let those who have
			Eyes look through him, then he may be useful.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Thou wilt have no Mystery and Mysticism; wilt
			walk through thy world by the sunshine of what thou
			callest Truth, or even by the hand-lamp of what I call
			Attorney-Logic; and &#8220;explain&#8221; all, &#8220;account&#8221; for
			all, or believe nothing of it? Nay, thou wilt attempt
			laughter; whoso recognises the unfathomable, all-pervading
			domain of Mystery, which is everywhere under
			our feet and among our hands; to whom the Universe
			is an Oracle and Temple, as well as a Kitchen and
			Cattlestall,&#8212;he shall be a delirious Mystic; to him
			thou, with sniffing charity, wilt protrusively proffer thy
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page52" name="page52"></a>52</span>hand-lamp, and shriek, as one injured, when he kicks
			his foot through it?&#8212;<i>Armer Teufel!</i> Doth not thy cow
			calve, doth not thy bull gender? Thou thyself, wert
			thou not born, wilt thou not die? &#8220;Explain&#8221; me all
			this, or do one of two things: Retire into private places
			with thy foolish cackle; or, what were better, give it
			up, and weep, not that the reign of wonder is done, and
			God&#8217;s world all disembellished and prosaic, but that
			thou hitherto art a Dilettante and sandblind Pedant.&#8217;</p>

		</div>
		<div id="book_1_chapter_11" class="chapter">
			<p class="chapter_head">CHAPTER XI</p>
			<h3 class="chapter_title">PROSPECTIVE</h3>

			<p><span class="first_word">The</span> Philosophy of Clothes is now to all readers, as
			we predicted it would do, unfolding itself into new
			boundless expansions, of a cloudclapt, almost chimerical
			aspect, yet not without azure loomings in the far distance,
			and streaks as of an Elysian brightness; the
			highly questionable purport and promise of which it is
			becoming more and more important for us to ascertain.
			Is that a real Elysian brightness, cries many a timid
			wayfarer, or the reflex of Pandemonian lava? Is it of a
			truth leading us into beatific Asphodel meadows, or the
			yellow-burning marl of a Hell-on-Earth?</p>

			<p>Our Professor, like other Mystics, whether delirious
			or inspired, gives an Editor enough to do. Ever
			higher and dizzier are the heights he leads us to; more
			piercing, all-comprehending, all-confounding are his
			views and glances. For example, this of Nature being
			not an Aggregate but a Whole:</p>

			<p>&#8216;Well sang the Hebrew Psalmist: &#8220;If I take the
			wings of the morning and dwell in the uttermost parts
			of the universe, God is there.&#8221; Thou thyself, O cultivated
			reader, who too probably art no Psalmist, but
			a Prosaist, knowing <span class="special_emphasis">God</span> only by tradition, knowest
			thou any corner of the world where at least <span class="special_emphasis">Force</span> is
			not? The drop which thou shakest from thy wet hand,
			rests not where it falls, but to-morrow thou findest it
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page53" name="page53"></a>53</span>swept away; already on the wings of the Northwind,
			it is nearing the Tropic of Cancer. How came it
			to evaporate, and not lie motionless? Thinkest thou
			there is aught motionless; without Force, and utterly
			dead?</p>

			<p>&#8216;As I rode through the Schwarzwald, I said to myself:
			That little fire which grows star-like across the
			dark-growing (<i>nachtende</i>) moor, where the sooty smith
			bends over his anvil, and thou hopest to replace thy lost
			horse-shoe,&#8212;is it a detached, separated speck, cut-off
			from the whole Universe; or indissolubly joined to the
			whole? Thou fool, that smithy-fire was (primarily)
			kindled at the Sun; is fed by air that circulates from
			before Noah&#8217;s Deluge, from beyond the Dogstar; therein,
			with Iron Force, and Coal Force, and the far
			stranger Force of Man, are cunning affinities and battles
			and victories of Force brought about; it is a little ganglion,
			or nervous centre, in the great vital system of
			Immensity. Call it, if thou wilt, an unconscious Altar,
			kindled on the bosom of the All; whose iron sacrifice,
			whose iron smoke and influence reach quite through
			the All; whose dingy Priest, not by word, yet by brain
			and sinew, preaches forth the mystery of Force; nay
			preaches forth (exoterically enough) one little textlet
			from the Gospel of Freedom, the Gospel of Man&#8217;s Force,
			commanding, and one day to be all-commanding.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Detached, separated! I say there is no such
			separation: nothing hitherto was ever stranded, cast
			aside; but all, were it only a withered leaf, works
			together with all; is borne forward on the bottomless,
			shoreless flood of Action, and lives through perpetual
			metamorphoses. The withered leaf is not dead and
			lost, there are Forces in it and around it, though working
			in inverse order; else how could it <em>rot</em>? Despise
			not the rag from which man makes Paper, or the litter
			from which the earth makes Corn. Rightly viewed no
			meanest object is insignificant; all objects are as
			windows, through which the philosophic eye looks into
			Infinitude itself.&#8217;</p>

			<p>Again, leaving that wondrous Schwarzwald Smithy-Altar,
			what vacant, high-sailing air-ships are these, and
			whither will they sail with us?</p>

			<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page54" name="page54"></a>54</span>&#8216;All visible things are emblems; what thou seest is
			not there on its own account; strictly taken, is not
			there at all: Matter exists only spiritually, and to
			represent some Idea, and <em>body</em> it forth. Hence Clothes,
			as despicable as we think them, are so unspeakably
			significant. Clothes, from the King&#8217;s mantle downwards,
			are emblematic not of want only, but of a manifold
			cunning Victory over Want. On the other hand,
			all Emblematic things are properly Clothes, thought-woven
			or hand-woven: must not the Imagination weave
			Garments, visible Bodies, wherein the else invisible
			creations and inspirations of our Reason are, like
			Spirits, revealed, and first become all-powerful;&#8212;the
			rather if, as we often see, the Hand too aid her, and
			(by wool Clothes or otherwise) reveal such even to the
			outward eye?</p>

			<p>&#8216;Men are properly said to be clothed with Authority,
			clothed with Beauty, with Curses, and the like. Nay,
			if you consider it, what is Man himself, and his whole
			terrestrial Life, but an Emblem; a Clothing or visible
			Garment for that divine <span class="special_emphasis">Me</span> of his, cast hither, like a
			light-particle, down from Heaven? Thus is he said
			also to be clothed with a Body.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Language is called the Garment of Thought: however,
			it should rather be, Language is the Flesh-Garment,
			the Body, of thought. I said that Imagination
			wove this Flesh-Garment; and does not she? Metaphors
			are her stuff: examine Language; what, if you
			except some few primitive elements (of natural sound),
			what is it all but Metaphors, recognised as such, or
			no longer recognised; still fluid and florid, or now
			solid-grown and colourless? If those same primitive
			elements are the osseous fixtures in the Flesh-Garment,
			Language,&#8212;then are Metaphors its muscles and tissues
			and living integuments. An unmetaphorical style you
			shall in vain seek for: is not your very <em>Attention</em> a
			<em>Stretching-to</em>? The difference lies here: some styles
			are lean, adust, wiry, the muscle itself seems osseous;
			some are even quite pallid, hunger-bitten and dead-looking;
			while others again glow in the flush of health
			and vigorous self-growth, sometimes (as in my own
			case) not without an apoplectic tendency. Moreover,
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page55" name="page55"></a>55</span>there are sham Metaphors, which overhanging that same
			Thought&#8217;s-Body (best naked), and deceptively bedizening,
			or bolstering it out, may be called its false stuffings,
			superfluous show-cloaks (<i>Putz-Mäntel</i>), and tawdry
			woollen rags: whereof he that runs and reads may
			gather whole hampers,&#8212;and burn them.&#8217;</p>

			<p>Than which paragraph on Metaphors did the reader
			ever chance to see a more surprisingly metaphorical?
			However, that is not our chief grievance; the Professor
			continues:</p>

			<p>&#8216;Why multiply instances? It is written, the
			Heavens and the Earth shall fade away like a Vesture;
			which indeed they are: the Time-vesture of the Eternal.
			Whatsoever sensibly exists, whatsoever represents
			Spirit to Spirit, is properly a Clothing, a suit of Raiment,
			put on for a season, and to be laid off. Thus in this
			one pregnant subject of <span class="special_emphasis">Clothes</span>, rightly understood,
			is included all that men have thought, dreamed, done,
			and been: the whole External Universe and what it
			holds is but Clothing; and the essence of all Science
			lies in the <span class="special_emphasis">Philosophy of Clothes</span>.&#8217;</p>

			<p>Towards these dim infinitely-expanded regions, close-bordering
			on the impalpable Inane, it is not without
			apprehension, and perpetual difficulties, that the Editor
			sees himself journeying and struggling. Till lately a
			cheerful daystar of hope hung before him, in the expected
			Aid of Hofrath Heuschrecke; which daystar,
			however, melts now, not into the red of morning, but
			into a vague, gray half-light, uncertain whether dawn
			of day or dusk of utter darkness. For the last week,
			these so-called Biographical Documents are in his hand.
			By the kindness of a Scottish Hamburg Merchant,
			whose name, known to the whole mercantile world, he
			must not mention; but whose honourable courtesy, now
			and often before spontaneously manifested to him, a
			mere literary stranger, he cannot soon forget,&#8212;the
			bulky Weissnichtwo Packet, with all its Custom-house
			seals, foreign hieroglyphs, and miscellaneous tokens of
			Travel, arrived here in perfect safety, and free of cost.
			The reader shall now fancy with what hot haste it was
			broken up, with what breathless expectation glanced
			over; and, alas, with what unquiet disappointment it
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page56" name="page56"></a>56</span>has, since then, been often thrown down, and again
			taken up.</p>

			<p>Hofrath Heuschrecke, in a too long-winded Letter,
			full of compliments, Weissnichtwo politics, dinners,
			dining repartees, and other ephemeral trivialities, proceeds
			to remind us of what we know well already: that
			however it may be with Metaphysics, and other abstract
			Science originating in the Head (<i>Verstand</i>) alone, no
			Life-Philosophy (<i>Lebensphilosophie</i>), such as this of
			Clothes pretends to be, which originates equally in the
			Character (<i>Gemüth</i>), and equally speaks thereto, can
			attain its significance till the Character itself is known
			and seen; &#8216;till the Author&#8217;s View of the World
			(<i>Weltansicht</i>), and how he actively and passively came
			by such view, are clear: in short till a Biography of
			him has been philosophico-poetically written, and philosophico-poetically
			read.&#8217; &#8216;Nay,&#8217; adds he, &#8216;were the
			speculative scientific Truth even known, you still, in this
			inquiring age, ask yourself, Whence came it, and Why,
			and How?&#8212;and rest not, till, if no better may be,
			Fancy have shaped-out an answer; and either in the
			authentic lineaments of Fact, or the forged ones of
			Fiction, a complete picture and Genetical History of
			the Man and his spiritual Endeavour lies before you.
			But why,&#8217; says the Hofrath, and indeed say we, &#8216;do
			I dilate on the uses of our Teufelsdröckh&#8217;s Biography?
			The great Herr Minister von Goethe has penetratingly
			remarked that &#8220;Man is properly the <em>only</em> object that
			interests man&#8221;: thus I too have noted, that in Weissnichtwo
			our whole conversation is little or nothing else
			but Biography or Auto-Biography; ever humano-anecdotical
			(<i>menschlich-anekdotisch</i>). Biography is by
			nature the most universally profitable, universally
			pleasant of all things: especially Biography of distinguished
			individuals.</p>

			<p>&#8216;By this time, <i>mein Verehrtester</i> (my Most
			Esteemed),&#8217; continues he, with an eloquence which,
			unless the words be purloined from Teufelsdröckh, or
			some trick of his, as we suspect, is well-nigh unaccountable,
			&#8216;by this time you are fairly plunged (<i>vertieft</i>) in
			that mighty forest of Clothes-Philosophy; and looking
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page57" name="page57"></a>57</span>round, as all readers do, with astonishment enough.
			Such portions and passages as you have already
			mastered, and brought to paper, could not but awaken
			a strange curiosity touching the mind they issued from;
			the perhaps unparalleled psychical mechanism, which
			manufactured such matter, and emitted it to the light
			of day. Had Teufelsdröckh also a father and mother;
			did he, at one time, wear drivel-bibs, and live on spoon-meat?
			Did he ever, in rapture and tears, clasp a friend&#8217;s
			bosom to his; looks he also wistfully into the long
			burial-aisle of the Past, where only winds, and their
			low harsh moan, give inarticulate answer? Has he
			fought duels;&#8212;good Heaven! how did he comport himself
			when in Love? By what singular stair-steps, in
			short, and subterranean passages, and sloughs of Despair,
			and steep Pisgah hills, has he reached this wonderful
			prophetic Hebron (a true Old-Clothes Jewry) where
			he now dwells?</p>

			<p>&#8216;To all these natural questions the voice of public
			History is as yet silent. Certain only that he has been,
			and is, a Pilgrim, and Traveller from a far Country;
			more or less footsore and travel-soiled; has parted with
			road-companions; fallen among thieves, been poisoned
			by bad cookery, blistered with bug-bites; nevertheless
			at every stage (for they have let him pass), has had the
			Bill to discharge. But the whole particulars of his
			Route, his Weather-observations, the picturesque
			Sketches he took, though all regularly jotted down (in
			indelible sympathetic-ink by an invisible interior Penman),
			are these nowhere forthcoming? Perhaps quite
			lost: one other leaf of that mighty Volume (of human
			Memory) left to fly abroad, unprinted, unpublished,
			unbound up, as waste paper; and to rot, the sport of
			rainy winds?</p>

			<p>&#8216;No, <i>verehrtester Herr Herausgeber</i>, in no wise! I
			here, by the unexampled favour you stand in with our
			Sage, send not a Biography only, but an Autobiography:
			at least the materials for such; wherefrom, if I misreckon
			not, your perspicacity will draw fullest insight:
			and so the whole Philosophy and Philosopher of Clothes
			will stand clear to the wondering eyes of England, nay
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page58" name="page58"></a>58</span>thence, through America, through Hindostan, and the
			antipodal New Holland, finally conquer (<i>einnehmen</i>)
			great part of this terrestrial Planet!&#8217;</p>

			<p>And now let the sympathising reader judge of our
			feeling when, in place of this same Autobiography with
			&#8216;fullest insight,&#8217; we find&#8212;Six considerable <span class="special_emphasis">Paper-Bags</span>,
			carefully sealed, and marked successively, in gilt
			China-ink, with the symbols of the Six southern
			Zodiacal Signs, beginning at Libra; in the inside of
			which sealed Bags lie miscellaneous masses of Sheets,
			and oftener Shreds and Snips, written in Professor
			Teufelsdröckh&#8217;s scarce legible <i>cursiv-schrift</i>; and treating
			of all imaginable things under the Zodiac and
			above it, but of his own personal history only at rare
			intervals, and then in the most enigmatic manner.</p>

			<p>Whole fascicles there are, wherein the Professor, or,
			as he here, speaking in the third person, calls himself,
			&#8216;the Wanderer,&#8217; is not once named. Then again,
			amidst what seems to be a Metaphysico-theological
			Disquisition, &#8216;Detached Thoughts on the Steam-engine,&#8217;
			or, &#8216;The continued Possibility of Prophecy,&#8217;
			we shall meet with some quite private, not unimportant
			Biographical fact. On certain sheets stand Dreams,
			authentic or not, while the circumjacent waking Actions
			are omitted. Anecdotes, oftenest without date of
			place or time, fly loosely on separate slips, like Sibylline
			leaves. Interspersed also are long purely Autobiographical
			delineations; yet without connexion, without
			recognisable coherence; so unimportant, so superfluously
			minute, they almost remind us of &#8216;P.P. Clerk
			of this Parish.&#8217; Thus does famine of intelligence alternate
			with waste. Selection, order, appears to be unknown
			to the Professor. In all Bags the same imbroglio;
			only perhaps in the Bag <i>Capricorn</i>, and those near it,
			the confusion a little worse confounded. Close by a
			rather eloquent Oration, &#8216;On receiving the Doctor&#8217;s-Hat,&#8217;
			lie washbills, marked <i>bezahlt</i> (settled). His
			Travels are indicated by the Street-Advertisements of
			the various cities he has visited; of which Street-Advertisements,
			in most living tongues, here is perhaps
			the completest collection extant.</p>

			<p>So that if the Clothes-Volume itself was too like a
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page59" name="page59"></a>59</span>Chaos, we have now instead of the solar Luminary that
			should still it, the airy Limbo which by intermixture
			will farther volatilise and discompose it! As we shall
			perhaps see it our duty ultimately to deposit these Six
			Paper-Bags in the British Museum, farther description,
			and all vituperation of them, may be spared. Biography
			or Autobiography of Teufelsdröckh there is,
			clearly enough, none to be gleaned here: at most some
			sketchy, shadowy fugitive likeness of him may, by
			unheard-of efforts, partly of intellect, partly of imagination,
			on the side of Editor and of Reader; rise up
			between them. Only as a gaseous-chaotic Appendix to
			that aqueous-chaotic Volume can the contents of the
			Six Bags hover round us, and portions thereof be incorporated
			with our delineation of it.</p>

			<p>Daily and nightly does the Editor sit (with green
			spectacles) deciphering these unimaginable Documents
			from their perplexed <i>cursiv-schrift</i>; collating them with
			the almost equally unimaginable Volume, which stands
			in legible print. Over such a universal medley of high
			and low, of hot, cold, moist and dry, is he here struggling
			(by union of like with like, which is Method) to
			build a firm Bridge for British travellers. Never perhaps
			since our first Bridge-builders, Sin and Death,
			built that stupendous Arch from Hell-gate to the Earth,
			did any Pontifex, or Pontiff, undertake such a task as
			the present Editor. For in this Arch too, leading, as
			we humbly presume, far otherwards than that grand
			primeval one, the materials are to be fished-up from the
			weltering deep, and down from the simmering air, here
			one mass, there another, and cunningly cemented, while
			the elements boil beneath: nor is there any supernatural
			force to do it with; but simply the Diligence and feeble
			thinking Faculty of an English Editor, endeavouring to
			evolve printed Creation out of a German printed and
			written Chaos, wherein, as he shoots to and fro in it,
			gathering, clutching, piercing the Why to the far-distant
			Wherefore, his whole Faculty and Self are like to
			be swallowed up.</p>

			<p>Patiently, under these incessant toils and agitations,
			does the Editor, dismissing all anger, see his otherwise
			robust health declining; some fraction of his allotted
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page60" name="page60"></a>60</span>natural sleep nightly leaving him, and little but an
			inflamed nervous-system to be looked for. What is the
			use of health, or of life, if not to do some work therewith?
			And what work nobler than transplanting foreign
			Thought into the barren domestic soil; except indeed
			planting Thought of your own, which the fewest are
			privileged to do? Wild as it looks, this Philosophy of
			Clothes, can we ever reach its real meaning, promises
			to reveal new-coming Eras, the first dim rudiments and
			already-budding germs of a nobler Era, in Universal
			History. Is not such a prize worth some striving?
			Forward with us, courageous reader; be it towards
			failure, or towards success! The latter thou sharest
			with us; the former also is not all our own.</p>

		</div>
	</div>
	<div id="book_second" class="book">
		<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page61" name="page61"></a>61</span></p>
		<h2 class="book_title">BOOK SECOND</h2>
		<div id="book_2_chapter_1" class="chapter">
			<p class="chapter_head">CHAPTER I</p>
			<h3 class="chapter_title">GENESIS</h3>

			<p><span class="first_word">In</span> a psychological point of view, it is perhaps questionable
			whether from birth and genealogy, how closely
			scrutinised soever, much insight is to be gained. Nevertheless,
			as in every phenomenon the Beginning remains
			always the most notable moment; so, with regard to
			any great man, we rest not till, for our scientific profit
			or not, the whole circumstances of his first appearance
			in this Planet, and what manner of Public Entry he
			made, are with utmost completeness rendered manifest.
			To the Genesis of our Clothes-Philosopher, then, be this
			First Chapter consecrated. Unhappily, indeed, he
			seems to be of quite obscure extraction; uncertain, we
			might almost say, whether of any: so that this Genesis
			of his can properly be nothing but an Exodus (or transit
			out of Invisibility into Visibility); whereof the preliminary
			portion is nowhere forthcoming.</p>

			<p>&#8216;In the village of Entepfuhl,&#8217; thus writes he, in the
			Bag <i>Libra</i>, on various Papers, which we arrange with
			difficulty, &#8216;dwelt Andreas Futteral and his wife; childless,
			in still seclusion, and cheerful though now verging
			towards old age. Andreas had been grenadier Sergeant,
			and even regimental Schoolmaster under Frederick the
			Great; but now, quitting the halbert and ferule for the
			spade and pruning-hook, cultivated a little Orchard, on
			the produce of which he, Cincinnatus-like, lived not
			without dignity. Fruits, the peach, the apple, the grape,
			with other varieties came in their season; all which
			Andreas knew how to sell: on evenings he smoked
			largely, or read (as beseemed a regimental Schoolmaster),
			and talked to neighbours that would listen
			about the Victory of Rossbach; and how Fritz the Only
			(<i>der Einzige</i>) had once with his own royal lips spoken
			to him, had been pleased to say, when Andreas as
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page62" name="page62"></a>62</span>camp-sentinel demanded the pass-word, &#8220;<i>Schweig Hund</i>
			(Peace, hound)!&#8221; before any of his staff-adjutants could
			answer. &#8220;<i>Das nenn&#8217; ich mir einen König</i>, There is
			what I call a King,&#8221; would Andreas exclaim: &#8220;but the
			smoke of Kunersdorf was still smarting his eyes.&#8221;</p>

			<p>&#8216;Gretchen, the housewife, won like Desdemona by
			the deeds rather than the looks of her now veteran
			Othello, lived not in altogether military subordination;
			for, as Andreas said, &#8220;the womankind will not drill (<i>wer
			kann die Weiberchen dressiren</i>)&#8221;: nevertheless she at
			heart loved him both for valour and wisdom; to her a
			Prussian grenadier Sergeant and Regiment&#8217;s Schoolmaster
			was little other than a Cicero and Cid: what
			you see, yet cannot see over, is as good as infinite.
			Nay, was not Andreas in very deed a man of order,
			courage, downrightness (<i>Geradheit</i>); that understood
			Büsching&#8217;s <i>Geography</i>, had been in the victory of Rossbach,
			and left for dead in the camisade of Hochkirch?
			The good Gretchen, for all her fretting, watched over
			him and hovered round him as only a true housemother
			can: assiduously she cooked and sewed and scoured
			for him; so that not only his old regimental sword and
			grenadier-cap, but the whole habitation and environment,
			where on pegs of honour they hung, looked ever
			trim and gay: a roomy painted Cottage, embowered in
			fruit-trees and forest-trees, evergreens and honeysuckles;
			rising many-coloured from amid shaven grass-plots,
			flowers struggling-in through the very windows;
			under its long projecting eaves nothing but garden-tools
			in methodic piles (to screen them from rain), and
			seats where, especially on summer nights, a King might
			have wished to sit and smoke, and call it his. Such a
			<i>Bauergut</i> (Copyhold) had Gretchen given her veteran;
			whose sinewy arms, and long-disused gardening talent,
			had made it what you saw.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Into this umbrageous Man&#8217;s-nest, one meek yellow
			evening or dusk, when the Sun, hidden indeed from
			terrestrial Entepfuhl, did nevertheless journey visible
			and radiant along the celestial Balance (<em>Libra</em>), it was
			that a Stranger of reverend aspect entered; and, with
			grave salutation, stood before the two rather astonished
			housemates. He was close-muffled in a wide mantle;
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page63" name="page63"></a>63</span>which without further parley unfolding, he deposited
			therefrom what seemed some Basket, overhung with
			green Persian silk; saying only: <i>Ihr lieben Leute, hier
			bringe ein unschätzbares Verleihen; nehmt es in aller
			Acht, sorgfältigst benützt es: mit hohem Lohn, oder
			wohl mit schweren Zinsen, wird&#8217;s einst zurückgefordert.</i>
			&#8220;Good Christian people, here lies for you an invaluable
			Loan; take all heed thereof, in all carefulness employ
			it: with high recompense, or else with heavy penalty,
			will it one day be required back.&#8221; Uttering which
			singular words, in a clear, bell-like, forever memorable
			tone, the Stranger gracefully withdrew; and before
			Andreas or his wife, gazing in expectant wonder, had
			time to fashion either question or answer, was clean
			gone. Neither out of doors could aught of him be seen
			or heard; he had vanished in the thickets, in the dusk;
			the Orchard-gate stood quietly closed: the Stranger
			was gone once and always. So sudden had the whole
			transaction been, in the autumn stillness and twilight,
			so gentle, noiseless, that the Futterals could have
			fancied it all a trick of Imagination, or some visit from
			an authentic Spirit. Only that the green-silk Basket,
			such as neither Imagination nor authentic Spirits are
			wont to carry, still stood visible and tangible on their
			little parlour-table. Towards this the astonished couple,
			now with lit candle, hastily turned their attention. Lifting
			the green veil, to see what invaluable it hid, they
			descried there, amid down and rich white wrappages,
			no Pitt Diamond or Hapsburg Regalia, but, in the
			softest sleep, a little red-coloured Infant! Beside it,
			lay a roll of gold Friedrichs, the exact amount of which
			was never publicly known; also a <i>Taufschein</i> (baptismal
			certificate), wherein unfortunately nothing but the Name
			was decipherable; other document or indication none
			whatever.</p>

			<p>&#8216;To wonder and conjecture was unavailing, then and
			always thenceforth. Nowhere in Entepfuhl, on the
			morrow or next day, did tidings transpire of any such
			figure as the Stranger; nor could the Traveller, who had
			passed through the neighbouring Town in coach-and-four,
			be connected with this Apparition, except in the
			way of gratuitous surmise. Meanwhile, for Andreas and
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page64" name="page64"></a>64</span>his wife, the grand practical problem was: What to do
			with this little sleeping red-coloured Infant? Amid
			amazements and curiosities, which had to die away
			without external satisfying, they resolved, as in such
			circumstances charitable prudent people needs must, on
			nursing it, though with spoon-meat, into whiteness, and
			if possible into manhood. The Heavens smiled on their
			endeavour: thus has that same mysterious Individual
			ever since had a status for himself in this visible
			Universe, some modicum of victual and lodging and
			parade-ground; and now expanded in bulk, faculty and
			knowledge of good and evil, he, as <span class="special_emphasis">Herr Diogenes
			Teufelsdröckh</span>, professes or is ready to profess, perhaps
			not altogether without effect, in the new University
			of Weissnichtwo, the new Science of Things in
			General.&#8217;</p>

			<p>Our Philosopher declares here, as indeed we should
			think he well might, that these facts, first communicated,
			by the good Gretchen Futteral, in his twelfth
			year, &#8216;produced on the boyish heart and fancy a quite
			indelible impression. Who this Reverend Personage,&#8217;
			he says, &#8216;that glided into the Orchard Cottage when
			the Sun was in Libra, and then, as on spirit&#8217;s wings,
			glided out again, might be? An inexpressible desire,
			full of love and of sadness, has often since struggled
			within me to shape an answer. Ever, in my distresses
			and my loneliness, has Fantasy turned, full of longing
			(<i>sehnsuchtsvoll</i>), to that unknown Father, who perhaps
			far from me, perhaps near, either way invisible, might
			have taken me to his paternal bosom, there to lie
			screened from many a woe. Thou beloved Father, dost
			thou still, shut out from me only by thin penetrable
			curtains of earthly Space, wend to and fro among the
			crowd of the living? Or art thou hidden by those far
			thicker curtains of the Everlasting Night, or rather of
			the Everlasting Day, through which my mortal eye and
			outstretched arms need not strive to reach? Alas, I
			know not, and in vain vex myself to know. More than
			once, heart-deluded, have I taken for thee this and
			the other noble-looking Stranger; and approached him
			wistfully, with infinite regard; but he too had to repel
			me; he too was not thou.</p>

			<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page65" name="page65"></a>65</span>&#8216;And yet, O Man born of Woman,&#8217; cries the Autobiographer,
			with one of his sudden whirls, &#8216;wherein is
			my case peculiar? Hadst thou, any more than I, a
			Father whom thou knowest? The Andreas and Gretchen,
			or the Adam and Eve, who led thee into Life, and
			for a time suckled and pap-fed thee there, whom thou
			namest Father and Mother; these were, like mine, but
			thy nursing-father and nursing-mother: thy true Beginning
			and Father is in Heaven, whom with the bodily
			eye thou shalt never behold, but only with the spiritual.&#8217;</p>

			<p>&#8216;The little green veil,&#8217; adds he, among much similar
			moralising, and embroiled discoursing, &#8216;I yet keep;
			still more inseparably the Name, Diogenes Teufelsdröckh.
			From the veil can nothing be inferred: a
			piece of now quite faded Persian silk, like thousands
			of others. On the Name I have many times meditated
			and conjectured; but neither in this lay there any clue.
			That it was my unknown Father&#8217;s name I must hesitate
			to believe. To no purpose have I searched through all
			the Herald&#8217;s Books, in and without the German Empire,
			and through all manner of Subscriber-Lists (<i>Pränumeranten</i>),
			Militia-Rolls, and other Name-catalogues; extraordinary
			names as we have in Germany, the name
			Teufelsdröckh, except as appended to my own person,
			nowhere occurs. Again, what may the unchristian
			rather than Christian &#8220;Diogenes&#8221; mean? Did that
			reverend Basket-bearer intend, by such designation, to
			shadow-forth my future destiny, or his own present
			malign humour? Perhaps the latter, perhaps both.
			Thou ill-starred Parent, who like an Ostrich hadst to
			leave thy ill-starred offspring to be hatched into self-support
			by the mere sky-influences of Chance, can thy
			pilgrimage have been a smooth one? Beset by Misfortune
			thou doubtless hast been; or indeed by the
			worst figure of Misfortune, by Misconduct. Often have
			I fancied how, in thy hard life-battle, thou wert shot
			at, and slung at, wounded, hand-fettered, hamstrung,
			browbeaten and bedevilled by the Time-Spirit (<i>Zeitgeist</i>)
			in thyself and others, till the good soul first given thee
			was seared into grim rage; and thou hadst nothing for
			it but to leave in me an indignant appeal to the Future,
			and living speaking Protest against the Devil, as that
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page66" name="page66"></a>66</span>same Spirit not of the Time only, but of Time itself, is
			well named! Which Appeal and Protest, may I now
			modestly add, was not perhaps quite lost in air.</p>

			<p>&#8216;For indeed, as Walter Shandy often insisted, there
			is much, nay almost all, in Names. The Name is the
			earliest Garment you wrap round the earth-visiting <span class="special_emphasis">Me</span>;
			to which it thenceforth cleaves, more tenaciously (for
			there are Names that have lasted nigh thirty centuries)
			than the very skin. And now from without, what mystic
			influences does it not send inwards, even to the centre;
			especially in those plastic first-times, when the whole
			soul is yet infantine, soft, and the invisible seedgrain
			will grow to be an all overshadowing tree! Names?
			Could I unfold the influence of Names, which are the
			most important of all Clothings, I were a second greater
			Trismegistus. Not only all common Speech, but
			Science, Poetry itself is no other, if thou consider it,
			than a right <em>Naming</em>. Adam&#8217;s first task was giving
			names to natural Appearances: what is ours still but
			a continuation of the same; be the Appearances exotic-vegetable,
			organic, mechanic, stars or starry movements
			(as in Science); or (as in Poetry) passions, virtues,
			calamities, God-attributes, Gods?&#8212;In a very plain sense
			the Proverb says, <em>Call one a thief, and he will steal</em>;
			in an almost similar sense may we not perhaps say,
			<i>Call one Diogenes Teufelsdröckh, and he will open the
			Philosophy of Clothes?</i>&#8217;</p>

			<p class="post_thoughtbreak">&#8216;Meanwhile the incipient Diogenes, like others, all
			ignorant of his Why, his How or Whereabout, was
			opening his eyes to the kind Light; sprawling-out his
			ten fingers and toes; listening, tasting, feeling; in a
			word, by all his Five Senses, still more by his Sixth
			Sense of Hunger, and a whole infinitude of inward,
			spiritual, half-awakened Senses, endeavouring daily to
			acquire for himself some knowledge of this strange
			Universe where he had arrived, be his task therein
			what it might. Infinite was his progress; thus in some
			fifteen months, he could perform the miracle of&#8212;Speech!
			To breed a fresh Soul, is it not like brooding a fresh
			(celestial) Egg; wherein as yet all is formless, powerless;
			yet by degrees organic elements and fibres shoot
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page67" name="page67"></a>67</span>through the watery albumen; and out of vague Sensation
			grows Thought, grows Fantasy and Force, and we
			have Philosophies, Dynasties, nay Poetries and Religions!</p>

			<p>&#8216;Young Diogenes, or rather young Gneschen, for
			by such diminutive had they in their fondness named
			him, travelled forward to those high consummations,
			by quick yet easy stages. The Futterals, to avoid vain
			talk, and moreover keep the roll of gold Friedrichs safe,
			gave-out that he was a grand-nephew; the orphan of
			some sister&#8217;s daughter, suddenly deceased, in Andreas&#8217;s
			distant Prussian birthland; of whom, as of her indigent
			sorrowing widower, little enough was known at Entepfuhl.
			Heedless of all which, the Nurseling took to his
			spoon-meat, and throve. I have heard him noted as a
			still infant, that kept his mind much to himself; above
			all, that seldom or never cried. He already felt that time
			was precious; that he had other work cut-out for him
			than whimpering.&#8217;</p>

			<p class="post_thoughtbreak">Such, after utmost painful search and collation among
			these miscellaneous Paper-masses, is all the notice we
			can gather of Herr Teufelsdröckh&#8217;s genealogy. More
			imperfect, more enigmatic it can seem to few readers
			than to us. The Professor, in whom truly we more and
			more discern a certain satirical turn, and deep undercurrents
			of roguish whim, for the present stands pledged
			in honour, so we will not doubt him: but seems it not
			conceivable that, by the &#8216;good Gretchen Futteral,&#8217; or
			some other perhaps interested party, he has himself been
			deceived? Should these sheets, translated or not, ever
			reach the Entepfuhl Circulating Library, some cultivated
			native of that district might feel called to afford explanation.
			Nay, since Books, like invisible scouts, permeate
			the whole habitable globe, and Timbuctoo itself is not
			safe from British Literature, may not some Copy find
			out even the mysterious basket-bearing Stranger, who
			in a state of extreme senility perhaps still exists; and
			gently force even him to disclose himself; to claim
			openly a son, in whom any father may feel pride?</p>

		</div>
		<div id="book_2_chapter_2" class="chapter">
			<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page68" name="page68"></a>68</span></p>
			<p class="chapter_head">CHAPTER II</p>
			<h3 class="chapter_title">IDYLLIC</h3>

			<p>&#8216;<span class="first_word">Happy</span> season of Childhood!&#8217; exclaims Teufelsdröckh:
			&#8216;Kind Nature, that art to all a bountiful
			mother; that visitest the poor man&#8217;s hut with auroral
			radiance; and for thy Nurseling hast provided, a soft
			swathing of Love, and infinite Hope, wherein he waxes
			and slumbers, danced-round (<i>umgaukelt</i>) by sweetest
			Dreams! If the paternal Cottage still shuts us in, its
			roof still screens us; with a Father we have as yet a
			prophet, priest and king, and an Obedience that makes
			us free. The young spirit has awakened out of Eternity,
			and knows not what we mean by Time; as yet Time
			is no fast-hurrying stream, but a sportful sunlit ocean;
			years to the child are as ages: ah! the secret of Vicissitude,
			of that slower or quicker decay and ceaseless down-rushing
			of the universal World-fabric, from the granite
			mountain to the man or day-moth, is yet unknown; and
			in a motionless Universe, we taste, what afterwards in
			this quick-whirling Universe is forever denied us, the
			balm of Rest. Sleep on, thou fair Child, for thy long
			rough journey is at hand! A little while, and thou too
			shalt sleep no more, but thy very dreams shall be mimic
			battles; thou too, with old Arnauld, wilt have to say in
			stern patience: &#8220;Rest? Rest? Shall I not have all
			Eternity to rest in?&#8221; Celestial Nepenthe! though a
			Pyrrhus conquer empires, and an Alexander sack the
			world, he finds thee not; and thou hast once fallen
			gently, of thy own accord, on the eyelids, on the heart
			of every mother&#8217;s child. For as yet, sleep and waking
			are one: the fair Life-garden rustles infinite around, and
			everywhere is dewy fragrance, and the budding of Hope;
			which budding, if in youth, too frostnipt, it grow to
			flowers, will in manhood yield no fruit, but a prickly,
			bitter-rinded stone-fruit, of which the fewest can find
			the kernel.&#8217;</p>

			<p>In such rose-coloured light does our Professor, as
			Poets are wont, look back on his childhood; the historical
			details of which (to say nothing of much other
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page69" name="page69"></a>69</span>vague oratorical matter) he accordingly dwells on with
			an almost wearisome minuteness. We hear of Entepfuhl
			standing &#8216;in trustful derangement&#8217; among the
			woody slopes; the paternal Orchard flanking it as
			extreme out-post from below; the little Kuhbach gushing
			kindly by, among beech-rows, through river after
			river, into the Donau, into the Black Sea, into the Atmosphere
			and Universe; and how &#8216;the brave old Linden,&#8217;
			stretching like a parasol of twenty ells in radius, overtopping
			all other rows and clumps, towered-up from the
			central <i>Agora</i> and <i>Campus Martius</i> of the Village, like
			its Sacred Tree; and how the old men sat talking under
			its shadow (Gneschen often greedily listening), and the
			wearied labourers reclined, and the unwearied children
			sported, and the young men and maidens often danced
			to flute-music. &#8216;Glorious summer twilights,&#8217; cries
			Teufelsdröckh, &#8216;when the Sun, like a proud Conqueror
			and Imperial Taskmaster, turned his back, with his
			gold-purple emblazonry, and all his fireclad body-guard
			(of Prismatic Colours); and the tired brickmakers of
			this clay Earth might steal a little frolic, and those few
			meek Stars would not tell of them!&#8217;</p>

			<p>Then we have long details of the <i>Weinlesen</i> (Vintage),
			the Harvest-Home, Christmas, and so forth; with a
			whole cycle of the Entepfuhl Children&#8217;s-games, differing
			apparently by mere superficial shades from those
			of other countries. Concerning all which, we shall here,
			for obvious reasons, say nothing. What cares the world
			for our as yet miniature Philosopher&#8217;s achievements
			under that &#8216;brave old Linden&#8217;? Or even where is the
			use of such practical reflections as the following? &#8216;In
			all the sports of Children, were it only in their wanton
			breakages and defacements, you shall discern a creative
			instinct (<i>schaffenden Trieb</i>): the Mankin feels that he
			is a born Man, that his vocation is to work. The
			choicest present you can make him is a Tool; be it
			knife or pen-gun, for construction or for destruction;
			either way it is for Work, for Change. In gregarious
			sports of skill or strength, the Boy trains himself to Coöperation,
			for war or peace, as governor or governed:
			the little Maid again, provident of her domestic destiny,
			takes with preference to Dolls.&#8217;</p>

			<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page70" name="page70"></a>70</span>Perhaps, however, we may give this anecdote, considering
			who it is that relates it: &#8216;My first short-clothes
			were of yellow serge; or rather, I should say,
			my first short-cloth, for the vesture was one and indivisible,
			reaching from neck to ankle, a mere body with four
			limbs: of which fashion how little could I then divine
			the architectural, how much less the moral significance!&#8217;</p>

			<p>More graceful is the following little picture: &#8216;On
			fine evenings I was wont to carry-forth my supper
			(bread-crumb boiled in milk), and eat it out-of-doors.
			On the coping of the Orchard-wall, which I could reach
			by climbing, or still more easily if Father Andreas would
			set-up the pruning-ladder, my porringer was placed:
			there, many a sunset, have I, looking at the distant
			western Mountains, consumed, not without relish, my
			evening meal. Those hues of gold and azure, that
			hush of World&#8217;s expectation as Day died, were still a
			Hebrew Speech for me; nevertheless I was looking at
			the fair illuminated Letters, and had an eye for their
			gilding.&#8217;</p>

			<p>With &#8216;the little one&#8217;s friendship for cattle and
			poultry&#8217; we shall not much intermeddle. It may be
			that hereby he acquired a &#8216;certain deeper sympathy
			with animated Nature&#8217;: but when, we would ask,
			saw any man, in a collection of Biographical Documents,
			such a piece as this: &#8216;Impressive enough (<i>bedeutungsvoll</i>)
			was it to hear, in early morning, the Swineherd&#8217;s
			horn; and know that so many hungry happy quadrupeds
			were, on all sides, starting in hot haste to join
			him, for breakfast on the Heath. Or to see them at
			eventide, all marching-in again, with short squeak,
			almost in military order; and each, topographically
			correct, trotting-off in succession to the right or left,
			through its own lane, to its own dwelling; till old
			Kunz, at the Village-head, now left alone, blew his last
			blast, and retired for the night. We are wont to love
			the Hog chiefly in the form of Ham; yet did not these
			bristly thick-skinned beings here manifest intelligence,
			perhaps humour of character; at any rate, a touching,
			trustful submissiveness to Man,&#8212;who, were he but a
			Swineherd, in darned gabardine, and leather breeches
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page71" name="page71"></a>71</span>more resembling slate or discoloured-tin breeches, is
			still the Hierarch of this lower world?&#8217;</p>

			<p>It is maintained, by Helvetius and his set, that an
			infant of genius is quite the same as any other
			infant, only that certain surprisingly favourable influences
			accompany him through life, especially through
			childhood, and expand him, while others lie closefolded
			and continue dunces. Herein, say they, consists the
			whole difference between an inspired Prophet and a
			double-barrelled Game-preserver: the inner man of the
			one has been fostered into generous development; that
			of the other, crushed-down perhaps by vigour of animal
			digestion, and the like, has exuded and evaporated, or
			at best sleeps now irresuscitably stagnant at the bottom
			of his stomach. &#8216;With which opinion,&#8217; cries Teufelsdröckh,
			&#8216;I should as soon agree as with this other,
			that an acorn might, by favourable or unfavourable influences
			of soil and climate, be nursed into a cabbage,
			or the cabbage-seed into an oak.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Nevertheless,&#8217; continues he, &#8216;I too acknowledge
			the all-but omnipotence of early culture and nurture:
			hereby we have either a doddered dwarf bush, or a high-towering,
			wide-shadowing tree; either a sick yellow
			cabbage, or an edible luxuriant green one. Of a truth,
			it is the duty of all men, especially of all philosophers,
			to note-down with accuracy the characteristic circumstances
			of their Education, what furthered, what
			hindered, what in any way modified it: to which duty,
			nowadays so pressing for many a German Autobiographer,
			I also zealously address myself.&#8217;&#8212;Thou
			rogue! Is it by short-clothes of yellow serge, and
			swineherd horns, that an infant of genius is educated?
			And yet, as usual, it ever remains doubtful whether he
			is laughing in his sleeve at these Autobiographical times
			of ours, or writing from the abundance of his own fond
			ineptitude. For he continues: &#8216;If among the ever-streaming
			currents of Sights, Hearings, Feelings for
			Pain or Pleasure, whereby, as in a Magic Hall, young
			Gneschen went about environed, I might venture to
			select and specify, perhaps these following were also of
			the number:</p>

			<p>&#8216;Doubtless, as childish sports call forth Intellect,
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page72" name="page72"></a>72</span>Activity, so the young creature&#8217;s Imagination was
			stirred up, and a Historical tendency given him by the
			narrative habits of Father Andreas; who, with his
			battle-reminiscences, and gay austere yet hearty patriarchal
			aspect, could not but appear another Ulysses and
			&#8220;much-enduring Man.&#8221; Eagerly I hung upon his
			tales, when listening neighbours enlivened the hearth;
			from these perils and these travels, wild and far almost
			as Hades itself, a dim world of Adventure expanded
			itself within me. Incalculable also was the knowledge
			I acquired in standing by the Old Men under the Linden-tree:
			the whole of Immensity was yet new to me; and
			had not these reverend seniors, talkative enough, been
			employed in partial surveys thereof for nigh fourscore
			years? With amazement I began to discover that
			Entepfuhl stood in the middle of a Country, of a World;
			that there was such a thing as History, as Biography;
			to which I also, one day, by hand and tongue, might
			contribute.</p>

			<p>&#8216;In a like sense worked the <i>Postwagen</i> (Stage-coach),
			which, slow-rolling under its mountains of men and
			luggage, wended through our Village: northwards,
			truly, in the dead of night; yet southwards visibly at
			eventide. Not till my eighth year did I reflect that this
			Postwagen could be other than some terrestrial Moon,
			rising and setting by mere Law of Nature, like the
			heavenly one; that it came on made highways, from
			far cities towards far cities; weaving them like a monstrous
			shuttle into closer and closer union. It was then
			that, independently of Schiller&#8217;s <i>Wilhelm Tell</i>, I made
			this not quite insignificant reflection (so true also in
			spiritual things): <i>Any road, this simple Entepfuhl road,
			will lead you to the end of the world!</i></p>

			<p>&#8216;Why mention our Swallows, which, out of far
			Africa, as I learned, threading their way over seas and
			mountains, corporate cities and belligerent nations,
			yearly found themselves, with the month of May, snug-lodged
			in our Cottage Lobby? The hospitable Father
			(for cleanliness&#8217; sake) had fixed a little bracket plumb
			under their nest: there they built, and caught flies, and
			twittered, and bred; and all, I chiefly, from the heart
			loved them. Bright, nimble creatures, who taught <em>you</em>
			the mason-craft; nay, stranger still, gave you a masonic
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page73" name="page73"></a>73</span>incorporation, almost social police? For if, by ill
			chance, and when time pressed, your House fell, have I
			not seen five neighbourly Helpers appear next day; and
			swashing to and fro, with animated, loud, long-drawn
			chirpings, and activity almost super-hirundine, complete
			it again before nightfall?</p>

			<p>&#8216;But undoubtedly the grand summary of Entepfuhl
			child&#8217;s-culture, where as in a funnel its manifold influences
			were concentrated and simultaneously poured-down
			on us, was the annual Cattle-fair. Here, assembling
			from all the four winds, came the elements of an
			unspeakable hurly-burly. Nutbrown maids and nutbrown
			men, all clear-washed, loud-laughing, bedizened
			and beribanded; who came for dancing, for treating,
			and if possible, for happiness. Topbooted Graziers
			from the North; Swiss Brokers, Italian Drovers, also
			topbooted, from the South; these with their subalterns
			in leather jerkins, leather skull-caps, and long oxgoads;
			shouting in half-articulate speech, amid the inarticulate
			barking and bellowing. Apart stood Potters from far
			Saxony, with their crockery in fair rows; Nürnberg
			Pedlars, in booths that to me seemed richer than Ormuz
			bazaars; Showmen from the Lago Maggiore; detachments
			of the <i>Wiener Schub</i> (Offscourings of Vienna)
			vociferously superintending games of chance. Ballad-singers
			brayed, Auctioneers grew hoarse; cheap New
			Wine (<i>heuriger</i>) flowed like water, still worse confounding
			the confusion; and high over all, vaulted, in ground-and-lofty
			tumbling, a particoloured Merry-Andrew, like
			the genius of the place and of Life itself.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Thus encircled by the mystery of Existence; under
			the deep heavenly Firmament; waited-on by the four
			golden Seasons, with their vicissitudes of contribution,
			for even grim Winter brought its skating-matches and
			shooting-matches, its snow-storms and Christmas-carols,&#8212;did
			the Child sit and learn. These things were
			the Alphabet, whereby in aftertime he was to syllable
			and partly read the grand Volume of the World; what
			matters it whether such Alphabet be in large gilt letters
			or in small ungilt ones, so you have an eye to read it?
			For Gneschen, eager to learn, the very act of looking
			thereon was a blessedness that gilded all: his existence
			was a bright, soft element of Joy; out of which, as in
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page74" name="page74"></a>74</span>Prospero&#8217;s Island, wonder after wonder bodied itself
			forth, to teach by charming.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Nevertheless, I were but a vain dreamer to say, that
			even then my felicity was perfect. I had, once for all,
			come down from Heaven into the Earth. Among the
			rainbow colours that glowed on my horizon, lay even
			in childhood a dark ring of Care, as yet no thicker than
			a thread, and often quite overshone; yet always it
			reappeared, nay ever waxing broader and broader; till
			in after-years it almost over-shadowed my whole canopy,
			and threatened to engulf me in final night. It was the
			ring of Necessity whereby we are all begirt; happy he
			for whom a kind heavenly Sun brightens it into a ring
			of Duty, and plays round it with beautiful prismatic
			diffractions; yet ever, as basis and as bourne for our
			whole being, it is there.</p>

			<p class="post_thoughtbreak">&#8216;For the first few years of our terrestrial Apprenticeship,
			we have not much work to do; but, boarded and
			lodged gratis, are set down mostly to look about us
			over the workshop, and see others work, till we have
			understood the tools a little, and can handle this and
			that. If good Passivity alone, and not good Passivity
			and good Activity together, were the thing wanted, then
			was my early position favourable beyond the most. In
			all that respects openness of Sense, affectionate Temper,
			ingenuous Curiosity, and the fostering of these, what
			more could I have wished? On the other side, however,
			things went not so well. My Active Power
			(<i>Thatkraft</i>) was unfavourably hemmed-in; of which
			misfortune how many traces yet abide with me! In an
			orderly house, where the litter of children&#8217;s sports is
			hateful enough, your training is too stoical; rather to
			bear and forbear than to make and do. I was forbid
			much: wishes in any measure bold I had to renounce;
			everywhere a strait bond of Obedience inflexibly held
			me down. Thus already Freewill often came in painful
			collision with Necessity; so that my tears flowed, and
			at seasons the Child itself might taste that root of bitterness,
			wherewith the whole fruitage of our life is mingled
			and tempered.</p>

			<p>&#8216;In which habituation to Obedience, truly, it was
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page75" name="page75"></a>75</span>beyond measure safer to err by excess than by defect.
			Obedience is our universal duty and destiny; wherein
			whoso will not bend must break: too early and too
			thoroughly we cannot be trained to know that Would,
			in this world of ours, is as mere zero to Should, and for
			most part as the smallest of fractions even to Shall.
			Hereby was laid for me the basis of worldly Discretion,
			nay, of Morality itself. Let me not quarrel with my
			upbringing! It was rigorous, too frugal, compressively
			secluded, everyway unscientific: yet in that very strictness
			and domestic solitude might there not lie the root
			of deeper earnestness, of the stem from which all noble
			fruit must grow? Above all, how unskilful soever, it
			was loving, it was well-meant, honest; whereby every
			deficiency was helped. My kind Mother, for as such
			I must ever love the good Gretchen, did me one altogether
			invaluable service: she taught me, less indeed
			by word than by act and daily reverent look and habitude,
			her own simple version of the Christian Faith. Andreas
			too attended Church; yet more like a parade-duty, for
			which he in the other world expected pay with arrears,&#8212;as,
			I trust, he has received; but my Mother, with a
			true woman&#8217;s heart, and fine though uncultivated sense,
			was in the strictest acceptation Religious. How indestructibly
			the Good grows, and propagates itself, even
			among the weedy entanglements of Evil! The highest
			whom I knew on Earth I here saw bowed down, with
			awe unspeakable, before a Higher in Heaven: such
			things, especially in infancy, reach inwards to the very
			core of your being; mysteriously does a Holy of Holies
			build itself into visibility in the mysterious deeps; and
			Reverence, the divinest in man, springs forth undying
			from its mean envelopment of Fear. Wouldst thou
			rather be a peasant&#8217;s son that knew, were it never so
			rudely, there was a God in Heaven and in Man; or a
			duke&#8217;s son that only knew there were two-and-thirty
			quarters on the family-coach?&#8217;</p>

			<p>To which last question we must answer: Beware, O
			Teufelsdröckh, of spiritual pride!</p>

		</div>
		<div id="book_2_chapter_3" class="chapter">
			<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page76" name="page76"></a>76</span></p>

			<p class="chapter_head">CHAPTER III</p>

			<h3 class="chapter_title">PEDAGOGY</h3>

			<p><span class="first_word">Hitherto</span> we see young Gneschen, in his indivisible
			case of yellow serge, borne forward mostly on the arms
			of kind Nature alone; seated, indeed, and much to his
			mind, in the terrestrial workshop; but (except his soft
			hazel eyes, which we doubt not already gleamed with a
			still intelligence) called upon for little voluntary movement
			there. Hitherto, accordingly, his aspect is rather
			generic, that of an incipient Philosopher and Poet in
			the abstract; perhaps it would trouble Herr Heuschrecke
			himself to say wherein the special Doctrine of Clothes
			is as yet foreshadowed or betokened. For with Gneschen,
			as with others, the Man may indeed stand pictured
			in the Boy (at least all the pigments are there); yet only
			some half of the Man stands in the Child, or young
			Boy, namely, his Passive endowment, not his Active.
			The more impatient are we to discover what figure he
			cuts in this latter capacity; how when, to use his own
			words, &#8216;he understands the tools a little, and can
			handle this or that,&#8217; he will proceed to handle it.</p>

			<p>Here, however, may be the place to state that, in
			much of our Philosopher&#8217;s history, there is something
			of an almost Hindoo character: nay perhaps in that
			so well-fostered and everyway excellent &#8216;Passivity&#8217;
			of his, which, with no free development of the antagonist
			Activity, distinguished his childhood, we may detect
			the rudiments of much that, in after days, and still in
			these present days, astonishes the world. For the
			shallow-sighted, Teufelsdröckh is oftenest a man without
			Activity of any kind, a No-man; for the deep-sighted,
			again, a man with Activity almost superabundant,
			yet so spiritual, close-hidden, enigmatic, that no
			mortal can foresee its explosions, or even when it has
			exploded, so much as ascertain its significance. A
			dangerous, difficult temper for the modern European;
			above all, disadvantageous in the hero of a Biography!
			Now as heretofore it will behove the Editor of these
			pages, were it never so unsuccessfully, to do his
			endeavour.</p>

			<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page77" name="page77"></a>77</span>Among the earliest tools of any complicacy which
			a man, especially a man of letters, gets to handle, are
			his Class-books. On this portion of his History, Teufelsdröckh
			looks down professedly as indifferent. Reading
			he &#8216;cannot remember ever to have learned&#8217;; so
			perhaps had it by nature. He says generally: &#8216;Of
			the insignificant portion of my Education, which depended
			on Schools, there need almost no notice be taken.
			I learned what others learn; and kept it stored-by in a
			corner of my head, seeing as yet no manner of use in
			it. My Schoolmaster, a downbent, brokenhearted,
			underfoot martyr, as others of that guild are, did little
			for me, except discover that he could do little: he, good
			soul, pronounced me a genius, fit for the learned professions;
			and that I must be sent to the Gymnasium,
			and one day to the University. Meanwhile, what
			printed thing soever I could meet with I read. My
			very copper pocket-money I laid-out on stall-literature;
			which, as it accumulated, I with my own hands sewed
			into volumes. By this means was the young head
			furnished with a considerable miscellany of things and
			shadows of things: History in authentic fragments lay
			mingled with Fabulous chimeras, wherein also was
			reality; and the whole not as dead stuff, but as living
			pabulum, tolerably nutritive for a mind as yet so peptic.&#8217;</p>

			<p>That the Entepfuhl Schoolmaster judged well, we
			now know. Indeed, already in the youthful Gneschen,
			with all his outward stillness, there may have been
			manifest an inward vivacity that promised much;
			symptoms of a spirit singularly open, thoughtful, almost
			poetical. Thus, to say nothing of his Suppers on the
			Orchard-wall, and other phenomena of that earlier
			period, have many readers of these pages stumbled, in
			their twelfth year, on such reflections as the following?
			&#8216;It struck me much, as I sat by the Kuhbach, one
			silent noontide, and watched it flowing, gurgling, to
			think how this same streamlet had flowed and gurgled,
			through all changes of weather and of fortune, from beyond
			the earliest date of History. Yes, probably on the
			morning when Joshua forded Jordan; even as at the
			midday when Cæsar, doubtless with difficulty, swam
			the Nile, yet kept his <i>Commentaries</i> dry,&#8212;this little
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page78" name="page78"></a>78</span>Kuhbach, assiduous as Tiber, Eurotas or Siloa, was
			murmuring on across the wilderness, as yet unnamed,
			unseen: here, too, as in the Euphrates and the Ganges,
			is a vein or veinlet of the grand World-circulation of
			Waters, which, with its atmospheric arteries, has lasted
			and lasts simply with the World. Thou fool! Nature
			alone is antique, and the oldest art a mushroom; that
			idle crag thou sittest on is six-thousand years of age.&#8217;
			In which little thought, as in a little fountain, may
			there not lie the beginning of those well-nigh unutterable
			meditations on the grandeur and mystery of <span class="special_emphasis">Time</span>, and
			its relation to <span class="special_emphasis">Eternity</span>, which play such a part in this
			Philosophy of Clothes?</p>

			<p>Over his Gymnasic and Academic years the Professor
			by no means lingers so lyrical and joyful as over his
			childhood. Green sunny tracts there are still; but intersected
			by bitter rivulets of tears, here and there stagnating
			into sour marshes of discontent. &#8216;With my first
			view of the Hinterschlag Gymnasium,&#8217; writes he, &#8216;my
			evil days began. Well do I still remember the red
			sunny Whitsuntide morning, when, trotting full of hope
			by the side of Father Andreas, I entered the main street
			of the place, and saw its steeple-clock (then striking
			Eight) and <i>Schuldthurm</i> (Jail), and the aproned or disaproned
			Burghers moving-in to breakfast: a little dog,
			in mad terror, was rushing past; for some human imps
			had tied a tin-kettle to its tail; thus did the agonised
			creature, loud-jingling, career through the whole length
			of the Borough, and become notable enough. Fit emblem
			of many a Conquering Hero, to whom Fate
			(wedding Fantasy to Sense, as it often elsewhere does)
			has malignantly appended a tin-kettle of Ambition, to
			chase him on; which the faster he runs, urges him the
			faster, the more loudly and more foolishly! Fit emblem
			also of much that awaited myself, in that mischievous
			Den; as in the World, whereof it was a portion and
			epitome!</p>

			<p>&#8216;Alas, the kind beech-rows of Entepfuhl were hidden
			in the distance: I was among strangers, harshly, at
			best indifferently, disposed towards me; the young heart
			felt, for the first time, quite orphaned and alone.&#8217; His
			schoolfellows, as is usual, persecuted him: &#8216;They were
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page79" name="page79"></a>79</span>Boys,&#8217; he says, &#8216;mostly rude Boys, and obeyed the
			impulse of rude Nature, which bids the deerherd fall
			upon any stricken hart, the duck-flock put to death any
			broken-winged brother or sister, and on all hands the
			strong tyrannise over the weak.&#8217; He admits, that
			though &#8216;perhaps in an unusual degree morally courageous,&#8217;
			he succeeded ill in battle, and would fain have
			avoided it; a result, as would appear, owing less to
			his small personal stature (for in passionate seasons he
			was &#8216;incredibly nimble&#8217;), than to his &#8216;virtuous principles&#8217;:
			&#8216;if it was disgraceful to be beaten,&#8217; says
			he, &#8216;it was only a shade less disgraceful to have so
			much as fought; thus was I drawn two ways at once,
			and in this important element of school-history, the war-element,
			had little but sorrow.&#8217; On the whole, that
			same excellent &#8216;Passivity,&#8217; so notable in Teufelsdröckh&#8217;s
			childhood, is here visibly enough again getting
			nourishment. &#8216;He wept often; indeed to such a degree
			that he was nicknamed <i>Der Weinende</i> (the Tearful),
			which epithet, till towards his thirteenth year, was
			indeed not quite unmerited. Only at rare intervals did
			the young soul burst-forth into fire-eyed rage, and, with
			a stormfulness (<i>Ungestüm</i>) under which the boldest
			quailed, assert that he too had Rights of Man, or at
			least of Mankin.&#8217; In all which, who does not discern
			a fine flower-tree and cinnamon-tree (of genius) nigh
			choked among pumpkins, reed-grass and ignoble shrubs;
			and forced if it would live, to struggle upwards only,
			and not outwards; into a <em>height</em> quite sickly, and disproportioned
			to its <em>breadth</em>?</p>

			<p>We find, moreover, that his Greek and Latin were
			&#8216;mechanically&#8217; taught; Hebrew scarce even mechanically;
			much else which they called History, Cosmography,
			Philosophy, and so forth, no better than not at
			all. So that, except inasmuch as Nature was still busy;
			and he himself &#8216;went about, as was of old his wont,
			among the Craftsmen&#8217;s workshops, there learning many
			things&#8217;; and farther lighted on some small store of
			curious reading, in Hans Wachtel the Cooper&#8217;s house,
			where he lodged,&#8212;his time, it would appear, was utterly
			wasted. Which facts the Professor has not yet learned
			to look upon with any contentment. Indeed, throughout
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page80" name="page80"></a>80</span>the whole of this Bag <i>Scorpio</i>, where we now are,
			and often in the following Bag, he shows himself unusually
			animated on the matter of Education, and not
			without some touch of what we might presume to be
			anger.</p>

			<p>&#8216;My Teachers,&#8217; says he, &#8216;were hide-bound Pedants,
			without knowledge of man&#8217;s nature, or of boy&#8217;s; or
			of aught save their lexicons and quarterly account-books.
			Innumerable dead Vocables (no dead Language,
			for they themselves knew no Language) they crammed
			into us, and called it fostering the growth of mind.
			How can an inanimate, mechanical Gerund-grinder, the
			like of whom will, in a subsequent century, be manufactured
			at Nürnberg out of wood and leather, foster
			the growth of anything; much more of Mind, which
			grows, not like a vegetable (by having its roots littered
			with etymological compost), but like a spirit, by mysterious
			contact of Spirit; Thought kindling itself at the
			fire of living Thought? How shall <em>he</em> give kindling, in
			whose own inward man there is no live coal, but all is
			burnt-out to a dead grammatical cinder? The Hinterschlag
			Professors knew syntax enough; and of the
			human soul thus much: that it had a faculty called
			Memory, and could be acted-on through the muscular
			integument by appliance of birch-rods.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Alas, so is it everywhere, so will it ever be; till
			the Hodman is discharged, or reduced to hodbearing,
			and an Architect is hired, and on all hands fitly encouraged:
			till communities and individuals discover,
			not without surprise, that fashioning the souls of a
			generation by Knowledge can rank on a level with blowing
			their bodies to pieces by Gunpowder; that with
			Generals and Fieldmarshals for killing, there should be
			world-honoured Dignitaries, and were it possible, true
			God-ordained Priests, for teaching. But as yet, though
			the Soldier wears openly, and even parades, his butchering-tool,
			nowhere, far as I have travelled, did the Schoolmaster
			make show of his instructing-tool: nay, were
			he to walk abroad with birch girt on thigh, as if he
			therefrom expected honour, would there not, among
			the idler class, perhaps a certain levity be excited?&#8217;</p>

			<p>In the third year of this Gymnasic period, Father
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page81" name="page81"></a>81</span>Andreas seems to have died: the young Scholar, otherwise
			so maltreated, saw himself for the first time clad
			outwardly in sables, and inwardly in quite inexpressible
			melancholy. &#8216;The dark bottomless Abyss, that lies under
			our feet, had yawned open; the pale kingdoms of Death,
			with all their innumerable silent nations and generations,
			stood before him; the inexorable word, <span class="special_emphasis">Never</span>!
			now first showed its meaning. My Mother wept, and
			her sorrow got vent; but in my heart there lay a whole
			lake of tears, pent-up in silent desolation. Nevertheless
			the unworn Spirit is strong; Life is so healthful
			that it even finds nourishment in Death: these stern
			experiences, planted down by Memory in my Imagination,
			rose there to a whole cypress-forest, sad but
			beautiful; waving, with not unmelodious sighs, in dark
			luxuriance, in the hottest sunshine, through long years
			of youth:&#8212;as in manhood also it does, and will do; for
			I have now pitched my tent under a Cypress-tree; the
			Tomb is now my inexpugnable Fortress, ever close by
			the gate of which I look upon the hostile armaments,
			and pains and penalties of tyrannous Life placidly
			enough, and listen to its loudest threatenings with a
			still smile. O ye loved ones, that already sleep in the
			noiseless Bed of Rest, whom in life I could only weep
			for and never help; and ye, who wide-scattered still
			toil lonely in the monster-bearing Desert, dyeing the
			flinty ground with your blood,&#8212;yet a little while, and
			we shall all meet <span class="special_emphasis_smaller">THERE</span>, and our Mother&#8217;s bosom will
			screen us all; and Oppression&#8217;s harness, and Sorrow&#8217;s
			fire-whip, and all the Gehenna Bailiffs that patrol and
			inhabit ever-vexed Time, cannot thenceforth harm us
			any more!&#8217;</p>

			<p>Close by which rather beautiful apostrophe, lies a
			laboured Character of the deceased Andreas Futteral;
			of his natural ability, his deserts in life (as Prussian
			Sergeant); with long historical inquiries into the genealogy
			of the Futteral Family, here traced back as far
			as Henry the Fowler: the whole of which we pass
			over, not without astonishment. It only concerns us
			to add, that now was the time when Mother Gretchen
			revealed to her foster-son that he was not at all of this
			kindred, or indeed of any kindred, having come into
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page82" name="page82"></a>82</span>historical existence in the way already known to us.
			&#8216;Thus was I doubly orphaned,&#8217; says he; &#8216;bereft not
			only of Possession, but even of Remembrance. Sorrow
			and Wonder, here suddenly united, could not but produce
			abundant fruit. Such a disclosure, in such a
			season, struck its roots through my whole nature: ever
			till the years of mature manhood, it mingled with my
			whole thoughts, was as the stem whereon all my day-dreams
			and night-dreams grew. A certain poetic elevation,
			yet also a corresponding civic depression, it
			naturally imparted: <em>I was like no other</em>; in which fixed-idea,
			leading sometimes to highest, and oftener to
			frightfullest results, may there not lie the first spring
			of Tendencies, which in my Life have become remarkable
			enough? As in birth, so in action, speculation,
			and social position, my fellows are perhaps not numerous.&#8217;</p>

			<p class="post_thoughtbreak">In the Bag <i>Sagittarius</i>, as we at length discover,
			Teufelsdröckh has become a University man; though,
			how, when, or of what quality, will nowhere disclose
			itself with the smallest certainty. Few things, in the
			way of confusion and capricious indistinctness, can now
			surprise our readers; not even the total want of dates,
			almost without parallel in a Biographical work. So
			enigmatic, so chaotic we have always found, and must
			always look to find, these scattered Leaves. In <i>Sagittarius</i>,
			however, Teufelsdröckh begins to show himself
			even more than usually Sibylline: fragments of all
			sorts; scraps of regular Memoir, College-Exercises,
			Programs, Professional Testimoniums, Milkscores, torn
			Billets, sometimes to appearance of an amatory cast;
			all blown together as if by merest chance, henceforth
			bewilder the sane Historian. To combine any picture
			of these University, and the subsequent, years; much
			more, to decipher therein any illustrative primordial
			elements of the Clothes-Philosophy, becomes such a
			problem as the reader may imagine.</p>

			<p>So much we can see; darkly, as through the foliage
			of some wavering thicket: a youth of no common
			endowment, who has passed happily through Childhood,
			less happily yet still vigorously through Boyhood, now
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page83" name="page83"></a>83</span>at length perfect in &#8216;dead vocables,&#8217; and set down,
			as he hopes, by the living Fountain, there to superadd
			Ideas and Capabilities. From such Fountain he draws,
			diligently, thirstily, yet never or seldom with his whole
			heart, for the water nowise suits his palate; discouragements,
			entanglements, aberrations are discoverable or
			supposable. Nor perhaps are even pecuniary distresses
			wanting; for &#8216;the good Gretchen, who in spite of
			advices from not disinterested relatives has sent him
			hither, must after a time withdraw her willing but too
			feeble hand.&#8217; Nevertheless in an atmosphere of Poverty
			and manifold Chagrin, the Humour of that young Soul,
			what character is in him, first decisively reveals itself;
			and, like strong sunshine in weeping skies, gives out
			variety of colours, some of which are prismatic. Thus,
			with the aid of Time and of what Time brings, has the
			stripling Diogenes Teufelsdröckh waxed into manly
			stature; and into so questionable an aspect, that we
			ask with new eagerness, How he specially came by it,
			and regret anew that there is no more explicit answer.
			Certain of the intelligible and partially significant fragments,
			which are few in number, shall be extracted
			from that Limbo of a Paper-bag, and presented with
			the usual preparation.</p>

			<p>As if, in the Bag <i>Scorpio</i>, Teufelsdröckh had not
			already expectorated his antipedagogic spleen; as if,
			from the name <i>Sagittarius</i>, he had thought himself
			called upon to shoot arrows, we here again fall-in with
			such matter as this: &#8216;The University where I was
			educated still stands vivid enough in my remembrance,
			and I know its name well; which name, however, I,
			from tenderness to existing interests and persons, shall
			in nowise divulge. It is my painful duty to say that,
			out of England and Spain, ours was the worst of all
			hitherto discovered Universities. This is indeed a time
			when right Education is, as nearly as may be, impossible:
			however, in degrees of wrongness there is
			no limit: nay, I can conceive a worse system than that
			of the Nameless itself; as poisoned victual may be
			worse than absolute hunger.</p>

			<p>&#8216;It is written, When the blind lead the blind, both
			shall fall into the ditch: wherefore, in such circumstances,
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page84" name="page84"></a>84</span>may it not sometimes be safer, if both leader
			and led simply&#8212;sit still? Had you, anywhere in Crim
			Tartary; walled-in a square enclosure; furnished it
			with a small, ill-chosen Library; and then turned loose
			into it eleven-hundred Christian striplings, to tumble
			about as they listed, from three to seven years: certain
			persons, under the title of Professors, being stationed
			at the gates, to declare aloud that it was a University,
			and exact considerable admission-fees,&#8212;you had, not
			indeed in mechanical structure, yet in spirit and result,
			some imperfect resemblance of our High Seminary. I
			say, imperfect; for if our mechanical structure was
			quite other, so neither was our result altogether the
			same: unhappily, we were not in Crim Tartary, but in
			a corrupt European city, full of smoke and sin; moreover,
			in the middle of a Public, which, without far
			costlier apparatus than that of the Square Enclosure,
			and Declaration aloud, you could not be sure of gulling.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Gullible, however, by fit apparatus, all Publics are;
			and gulled, with the most surprising profit. Towards
			anything like a <i>Statistics of Imposture</i>, indeed, little as
			yet has been done: with a strange indifference, our
			Economists, nigh buried under Tables for minor
			Branches of Industry, have altogether overlooked the
			grand all-overtopping Hypocrisy Branch; as if our
			whole arts of Puffery, of Quackery, Priestcraft, Kingcraft,
			and the innumerable other crafts and mysteries
			of that genus, had not ranked in Productive Industry
			at all! Can any one, for example, so much as say,
			What moneys, in Literature and Shoeblacking, are
			realised by actual Instruction and actual jet Polish;
			what by fictitious-persuasive Proclamation of such;
			specifying, in distinct items, the distributions, circulations,
			disbursements, incomings of said moneys, with
			the smallest approach to accuracy? But to ask, How
			far, in all the several infinitely-complected departments
			of social business, in government, education, in manual,
			commercial, intellectual fabrication of every sort, man&#8217;s
			Want is supplied by true Ware; how far by the mere
			Appearance of true Ware:&#8212;in other words, To what
			extent, by what methods, with what effects, in various
			times and countries, Deception takes the place of wages
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page85" name="page85"></a>85</span>of Performance: here truly is an Inquiry big with
			results for the future time, but to which hitherto only
			the vaguest answer can be given. If for the present,
			in our Europe, we estimate the ratio of Ware to Appearance
			of Ware so high even as at One to a Hundred
			(which, considering the Wages of a Pope, Russian
			Autocrat, or English Game-Preserver, is probably not
			far from the mark),&#8212;what almost prodigious saving
			may there not be anticipated, as the <i>Statistics of Imposture</i>
			advances, and so the manufacturing of Shams (that
			of Realities rising into clearer and clearer distinction
			therefrom) gradually declines, and at length becomes
			all but wholly unnecessary!</p>

			<p>&#8216;This for the coming golden ages. What I had to
			remark, for the present brazen one, is, that in several
			provinces, as in Education, Polity, Religion, where so
			much is wanted and indispensable, and so little can as
			yet be furnished, probably Imposture is of sanative,
			anodyne nature, and man&#8217;s Gullibility not his worst
			blessing. Suppose your sinews of war quite broken; I
			mean your military chest insolvent, forage all but exhausted;
			and that the whole army is about to mutiny,
			disband, and cut your and each other&#8217;s throat,&#8212;then
			were it not well could you, as if by miracle, pay them
			in any sort of fairy-money, feed them on coagulated
			water, or mere imagination of meat; whereby, till the
			real supply came up, they might be kept together and
			quiet? Such perhaps was the aim of Nature, who does
			nothing without aim, in furnishing her favourite, Man,
			with this his so omnipotent or rather omnipatient Talent
			of being Gulled.</p>

			<p>&#8216;How beautifully it works, with a little mechanism;
			nay, almost makes mechanism for itself! These Professors
			in the Nameless lived with ease, with safety,
			by a mere Reputation, constructed in past times, and
			then too with no great effort, by quite another class of
			persons. Which Reputation, like a strong, brisk-going
			undershot wheel, sunk into the general current, bade
			fair, with only a little annual repainting on their part,
			to hold long together, and of its own accord assiduously
			grind for them. Happy that it was so, for the Millers!
			They themselves needed not to work; their attempts
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page86" name="page86"></a>86</span>at working, at what they called Educating, now when
			I look back on it, filled me with a certain mute admiration.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Besides all this, we boasted ourselves a Rational
			University; in the highest degree hostile to Mysticism;
			thus was the young vacant mind furnished with much
			talk about Progress of the Species, Dark Ages, Prejudice,
			and the like; so that all were quickly enough
			blown out into a state of windy argumentativeness;
			whereby the better sort had soon to end in sick, impotent
			Scepticism; the worser sort explode (<i>crepiren</i>) in
			finished Self-conceit, and to all spiritual intents become
			dead.&#8212;But this too is portion of mankind&#8217;s lot. If
			our era is the Era of Unbelief, why murmur under it;
			is there not a better coming, nay come? As in long-drawn
			Systole and long-drawn Diastole, must the period
			of Faith alternate with the period of Denial; must the
			vernal growth, the summer luxuriance of all Opinions,
			Spiritual Representations and Creations, be followed
			by, and again follow, the autumnal decay, the winter
			dissolution. For man lives in Time, has his whole
			earthly being, endeavour and destiny shaped for him
			by Time: only in the transitory Time-Symbol is the
			ever-motionless Eternity we stand on made manifest.
			And yet, in such winter-seasons of Denial, it is for the
			nobler-minded perhaps a comparative misery to have
			been born, and to be awake and work; and for the duller
			a felicity, if, like hibernating animals, safe-lodged in
			some Salamanca University, or Sybaris City, or other
			superstitious or voluptuous Castle of Indolence, they
			can slumber-through, in stupid dreams, and only
			awaken when the loud-roaring hailstorms have all done
			their work, and to our prayers and martyrdoms the
			new Spring has been vouchsafed.&#8217;</p>

			<p>That in the environment, here mysteriously enough
			shadowed forth, Teufelsdröckh must have felt ill at
			ease, cannot be doubtful. &#8216;The hungry young,&#8217; he
			says, &#8216;looked up to their spiritual Nurses; and, for
			food, were bidden eat the east-wind. What vain jargon
			of controversial Metaphysic, Etymology, and mechanical
			Manipulation falsely named Science, was current there,
			I indeed learned, better perhaps than the most. Among
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page87" name="page87"></a>87</span>eleven-hundred Christian youths, there will not be
			wanting some eleven eager to learn. By collision with
			such, a certain warmth, a certain polish was communicated;
			by instinct and happy accident, I took less to
			rioting (<i>renommiren</i>), than to thinking and reading,
			which latter also I was free to do. Nay from the chaos
			of that Library, I succeeded in fishing-up more books
			perhaps than had been known to the very keepers thereof.
			The foundation of a Literary Life was hereby laid :
			I learned, on my own strength, to read fluently in almost
			all cultivated languages, on almost all subjects and
			sciences; farther, as man is ever the prime object to
			man, already it was my favourite employment to read
			character in speculation, and from the Writing to construe
			the Writer. A certain groundplan of Human
			Nature and Life began to fashion itself in me; wondrous
			enough, now when I look back on it; for my whole
			Universe, physical and spiritual, was as yet a Machine!
			However, such a conscious, recognised groundplan, the
			truest I had, <em>was</em> beginning to be there, and by additional
			experiments might be corrected and indefinitely
			extended.&#8217;</p>

			<p>Thus from poverty does the strong educe nobler
			wealth; thus in the destitution of the wild desert does
			our young Ishmael acquire for himself the highest of all
			possessions, that of Self-help. Nevertheless a desert
			this was, waste, and howling with savage monsters.
			Teufelsdröckh gives us long details of his &#8216;fever-paroxysms
			of Doubt&#8217;; his Inquiries concerning
			Miracles, and the Evidences of religious Faith; and
			how &#8216;in the silent night-watches, still darker in his
			heart than over sky and earth, he has cast himself before
			the All-seeing, and with audible prayers cried vehemently
			for Light, for deliverance from Death and the Grave.
			Not till after long years, and unspeakable agonies, did
			the believing heart surrender; sink into spell-bound
			sleep, under the night-mare, Unbelief; and, in this hag-ridden
			dream, mistake God&#8217;s fair living world for a
			pallid, vacant Hades and extinct Pandemonium. But
			through such Purgatory pain,&#8217; continues he, &#8216;it is
			appointed us to pass; first must the dead Letter of
			Religion own itself dead, and drop piecemeal into dust,
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page88" name="page88"></a>88</span>if the living Spirit of Religion, freed from this its
			charnel-house, is to arise on us, newborn of Heaven,
			and with new healing under its wings.&#8217;</p>

			<p>To which Purgatory pains, seemingly severe enough,
			if we add a liberal measure of Earthly distresses, want
			of practical guidance, want of sympathy, want of money,
			want of hope; and all this in the fervid season of
			youth, so exaggerated in imagining, so boundless in
			desires, yet here so poor in means,&#8212;do we not see a
			strong incipient spirit oppressed and overloaded from
			without and from within; the fire of genius struggling-up
			among fuel-wood of the greenest, and as yet with
			more of bitter vapour than of clear flame?</p>

			<p>From various fragments of Letters and other documentary
			scraps, it is to be inferred that Teufelsdröckh,
			isolated, shy, retiring as he was, had not altogether
			escaped notice: certain established men are aware of
			his existence; and, if stretching-out no helpful hand,
			have at least their eyes on him. He appears, though
			in dreary enough humour, to be addressing himself to
			the Profession of Law;&#8212;whereof, indeed, the world has
			since seen him a public graduate. But omitting these
			broken, unsatisfactory thrums of Economical relation,
			let us present rather the following small thread of Moral
			relation; and therewith, the reader for himself weaving
			it in at the right place, conclude our dim arras-picture
			of these University years.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Here also it was that I formed acquaintance with
			Herr Towgood, or, as it is perhaps better written, Herr
			Toughgut; a young person of quality (<i>von Adel</i>), from
			the interior parts of England. He stood connected, by
			blood and hospitality, with the Counts von Zähdarm, in
			this quarter of Germany; to which noble Family I likewise
			was, by his means, with all friendliness, brought
			near. Towgood had a fair talent, unspeakably ill-cultivated;
			with considerable humour of character: and,
			bating his total ignorance, for he knew nothing except
			Boxing and a little Grammar, showed less of that aristocratic
			impassivity, and silent fury, than for most part
			belongs to Travellers of his nation. To him I owe my
			first practical knowledge of the English and their ways;
			perhaps also something of the partiality with which I
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page89" name="page89"></a>89</span>have ever since regarded that singular people. Towgood
			was not without an eye, could he have come at
			any light. Invited doubtless by the presence of the
			Zähdarm Family, he had travelled hither, in the almost
			frantic hope of perfecting his studies; he, whose studies
			had as yet been those of infancy, hither to a University
			where so much as the notion of perfection, not to say
			the effort after it, no longer existed! Often we would
			condole over the hard destiny of the Young in this era:
			how, after all our toil, we were to be turned-out into the
			world, with beards on our chins indeed, but with few
			other attributes of manhood; no existing thing that we
			were trained to Act on, nothing that we could so much
			as Believe. &#8220;How has our head on the outside a
			polished Hat,&#8221; would Towgood exclaim, &#8220;and in the
			inside Vacancy, or a froth of Vocables and Attorney-Logic!
			At a small cost men are educated to make
			leather into shoes; but at a great cost, what am I
			educated to make? By Heaven, Brother! what I have
			already eaten and worn, as I came thus far, would
			endow a considerable Hospital of Incurables.&#8221;&#8212;&#8220;Man,
			indeed,&#8221; I would answer, &#8220;has a Digestive Faculty,
			which must be kept working, were it even partly by
			stealth. But as for our Mis-education, make not bad
			worse; waste not the time yet ours, in trampling on
			thistles because they have yielded us no figs. <i>Frisch zu,
			Bruder!</i> Here are Books, and we have brains to read
			them; here is a whole Earth and a whole Heaven, and
			we have eyes to look on them: <i>Frisch zu!</i>&#8221;</p>

			<p>&#8216;Often also our talk was gay; not without brilliancy,
			and even fire. We looked-out on Life, with its strange
			scaffolding, where all at once harlequins dance, and
			men are beheaded and quartered: motley, not unterrific
			was the aspect; but we looked on it like brave youths.
			For myself, these were perhaps my most genial hours.
			Towards this young warmhearted, strongheaded and
			wrongheaded Herr Towgood I was even near experiencing
			the now obsolete sentiment of Friendship. Yes,
			foolish Heathen that I was, I felt that, under certain
			conditions, I could have loved this man, and taken him
			to my bosom, and been his brother once and always.
			By degrees, however, I understood the new time, and
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page90" name="page90"></a>90</span>its wants. If man&#8217;s <em>Soul</em> is indeed, as in the Finnish
			Language, and Utilitarian Philosophy, a kind of
			<em>Stomach</em>, what else is the true meaning of Spiritual
			Union but an Eating together? Thus we, instead of
			Friends, are Dinner-guests; and here as elsewhere have
			cast away chimeras.&#8217;</p>

			<p>So ends, abruptly as is usual, and enigmatically, this
			little incipient romance. What henceforth becomes of
			the brave Herr Towgood, or Toughgut? He has dived-under,
			in the Autobiographical Chaos, and swims we
			see not where. Does any reader &#8216;in the interior parts
			of England&#8217; know of such a man?</p>

		</div>
		<div id="book_2_chapter_4" class="chapter">

			<p class="chapter_head">CHAPTER IV</p>

			<h3 class="chapter_title">GETTING UNDER WAY</h3>

			<p>&#8216;<span class="first_word">Thus</span>, nevertheless,&#8217; writes our autobiographer,
			apparently as quitting College, &#8216;was there realised Somewhat;
			namely, I, Diogenes Teufelsdröckh: a visible
			Temporary Figure (<i>Zeitbild</i>), occupying some cubic
			feet of Space, and containing within it Forces both
			physical and spiritual; hopes, passions, thoughts; the
			whole wondrous furniture, in more or less perfection,
			belonging to that mystery, a Man. Capabilities there
			were in me to give battle, in some small degree, against
			the great Empire of Darkness: does not the very Ditcher
			and Delver, with his spade, extinguish many a thistle
			and puddle; and so leave a little Order, where he found
			the opposite? Nay your very Daymoth has capabilities
			in this kind; and ever organises something (into its
			own Body, if no otherwise), which was before Inorganic;
			and of mute dead air makes living music,
			though only of the faintest, by humming.</p>

			<p>&#8216;How much more, one whose capabilities are
			spiritual; who has learned, or begun learning, the grand
			thaumaturgic art of Thought! Thaumaturgic I name
			it; for hitherto all Miracles have been wrought thereby,
			and henceforth innumerable will be wrought; whereof
			we, even in these days, witness some. Of the Poet&#8217;s
			and Prophet&#8217;s inspired Message, and how it makes and
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page91" name="page91"></a>91</span>unmakes whole worlds, I shall forbear mention: but
			cannot the dullest hear Steam-engines clanking around
			him? Has he not seen the Scottish Brassmith&#8217;s <span class="special_emphasis">Idea</span>
			(and this but a mechanical one) travelling on fire-wings
			round the Cape, and across two Oceans; and stronger
			than any other Enchanter&#8217;s Familiar, on all hands
			unweariedly fetching and carrying: at home, not only
			weaving Cloth, but rapidly enough overturning the
			whole old system of Society; and, for Feudalism and
			Preservation of the Game, preparing us, by indirect but
			sure methods, Industrialism and the Government of the
			Wisest? Truly a Thinking Man is the worst enemy the
			Prince of Darkness can have; every time such a one
			announces himself, I doubt not, there runs a shudder
			through the Nether Empire; and new Emissaries are
			trained, with new tactics, to, if possible, entrap him,
			and hoodwink and handcuff him.</p>

			<p>&#8216;With such high vocation had I too, as denizen of
			the Universe, been called. Unhappy it is, however, that
			though born to the amplest Sovereignty, in this way,
			with no less than sovereign right of Peace and War
			against the Time-Prince (<i>Zeitfürst</i>), or Devil, and all
			his Dominions, your coronation-ceremony costs such
			trouble, your sceptre is so difficult to get at, or even
			to get eye on!&#8217;</p>

			<p>By which last wiredrawn similitude does Teufelsdröckh
			mean no more than that young men find
			obstacles in what we call &#8216;getting under way&#8217;?
			&#8216;Not what I Have,&#8217; continues he, &#8216;but what I Do
			is my Kingdom. To each is given a certain inward
			Talent, a certain outward Environment of Fortune; to
			each, by wisest combination of these two, a certain
			maximum of Capability. But the hardest problem
			were ever this first: To find by study of yourself, and
			of the ground you stand on, what your combined inward
			and outward Capability specially is. For, alas, our
			young soul is all budding with Capabilities, and we see
			not yet which is the main and true one. Always too
			the new man is in a new time, under new conditions;
			his course can be the <i>fac-simile</i> of no prior one, but is
			by its nature original. And then how seldom will the
			outward Capability fit the inward: though talented
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page92" name="page92"></a>92</span>wonderfully enough, we are poor, unfriended, dyspeptical,
			bashful; nay what is worse than all, we are foolish.
			Thus, in a whole imbroglio of Capabilities, we go
			stupidly groping about, to grope which is ours, and
			often clutch the wrong one: in this mad work must
			several years of our small term be spent, till the purblind
			Youth, by practice, acquire notions of distance,
			and become a seeing Man. Nay, many so spend their
			whole term, and in ever-new expectation, ever-new disappointment,
			shift from enterprise to enterprise, and
			from side to side: till at length, as exasperated striplings
			of threescore-and-ten, they shift into their last
			enterprise, that of getting buried.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Such, since the most of us are too ophthalmic,
			would be the general fate; were it not that one thing
			saves us: our Hunger. For on this ground, as the
			prompt nature of Hunger is well known, must a prompt
			choice be made: hence have we, with wise foresight,
			Indentures and Apprenticeships for our irrational
			young; whereby, in due season, the vague universality
			of a Man shall find himself ready-moulded into a specific
			Craftsman; and so thenceforth work, with much or with
			little waste of Capability as it may be; yet not with the
			worst waste, that of time. Nay even in matters spiritual,
			since the spiritual artist too is born blind, and does not,
			like certain other creatures, receive sight in nine days,
			but far later, sometimes never,&#8212;is it not well that there
			should be what we call Professions, or Bread-studies
			(<i>Brodzwecke</i>), pre-appointed us? Here, circling like
			the gin-horse, for whom partial or total blindness is no
			evil, the Bread-artist can travel contentedly round and
			round, still fancying that it is forward and forward;
			and realise much: for himself victual; for the world an
			additional horse&#8217;s power in the grand corn-mill or
			hemp-mill of Economic Society. For me too had such
			a leading-string been provided; only that it proved a
			neck-halter, and had nigh throttled me, till I broke it off.
			Then, in the words of Ancient Pistol, did the world
			generally become mine oyster, which I, by strength or
			cunning, was to open, as I would and could. Almost
			had I deceased (<i>fast wär ich umgekommen</i>), so obstinately
			did it continue shut.&#8217;</p>

			<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page93" name="page93"></a>93</span>We see here, significantly foreshadowed, the spirit
			of much that was to befall our Autobiographer; the
			historical embodiment of which, as it painfully takes
			shape in his Life, lies scattered, in dim disastrous
			details, through this Bag <i>Pisces</i>, and those that follow.
			A young man of high talent, and high though still
			temper, like a young mettled colt, &#8216;breaks-off his neck-halter,&#8217;
			and bounds forth, from his peculiar manger,
			into the wide world; which, alas, he finds all rigorously
			fenced-in. Richest clover-fields tempt his eye; but to
			him they are forbidden pasture: either pining in progressive
			starvation, he must stand; or, in mad exasperation,
			must rush to and fro, leaping against sheer stone-walls,
			which he cannot leap over, which only lacerate
			and lame him; till at last, after thousand attempts and
			endurances, he, as if by miracle, clears his way; not
			indeed into luxuriant and luxurious clover, yet into a
			certain bosky wilderness where existence is still possible,
			and Freedom, though waited on by Scarcity, is
			not without sweetness. In a word, Teufelsdröckh
			having thrown-up his legal Profession, finds himself
			without landmark of outward guidance; whereby his
			previous want of decided Belief, or inward guidance, is
			frightfully aggravated. Necessity urges him on; Time
			will not stop, neither can he, a Son of Time; wild
			passions without solacement, wild faculties without
			employment, ever vex and agitate him. He too must
			enact that stern Monodrama, <i>No Object and no Rest</i>;
			must front its successive destinies, work through to its
			catastrophe, and deduce therefrom what moral he can.</p>

			<p>Yet let us be just to him, let us admit that his &#8216;neck-halter&#8217;
			sat nowise easy on him; that he was in some
			degree forced to break it off. If we look at the young
			man&#8217;s civic position, in this Nameless capital, as he
			emerges from its Nameless University, we can discern
			well that it was far from enviable. His first Law-Examination
			he has come through triumphantly; and
			can even boast that the <i>Examen Rigorosum</i> need not
			have frightened him: but though he is hereby &#8216;an
			<i>Auscultator</i> of respectability,&#8217; what avails it? There
			is next to no employment to be had. Neither, for a
			youth without connexions, is the process of Expectation
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page94" name="page94"></a>94</span>very hopeful in itself; nor for one of his disposition
			much cheered from without. &#8216;My fellow Auscultators,&#8217;
			he says, &#8216;were Auscultators: they dressed,
			and digested, and talked articulate words; other vitality
			showed they almost none. Small speculation in those
			eyes, that they did glare withal! Sense neither for the
			high nor for the deep, nor for aught human or divine,
			save only for the faintest scent of coming Preferment.&#8217;
			In which words, indicating a total estrangement on the
			part of Teufelsdröckh, may there not also lurk traces
			of a bitterness as from wounded vanity? Doubtless
			these prosaic Auscultators may have sniffed at him,
			with his strange ways; and tried to hate, and what was
			much more impossible, to despise him. Friendly communion,
			in any case, there could not be: already has
			the young Teufelsdröckh left the other young geese;
			and swims apart, though as yet uncertain whether he
			himself is cygnet or gosling.</p>

			<p>Perhaps, too, what little employment he had was
			performed ill, at best unpleasantly. &#8216;Great practical
			method and expertness&#8217; he may brag of; but is there
			not also great practical pride, though deep-hidden, only
			the deeper-seated? So shy a man can never have been
			popular. We figure to ourselves, how in those days he
			may have played strange freaks with his independence,
			and so forth: do not his own words betoken as much?
			&#8216;Like a very young person, I imagined it was with
			Work alone, and not also with Folly and Sin, in myself
			and others, that I had been appointed to struggle.&#8217; Be
			this as it may, his progress from the passive Auscultatorship,
			towards any active Assessorship, is evidently
			of the slowest. By degrees, those same established
			men, once partially inclined to patronise him, seem to
			withdraw their countenance, and give him up as &#8216;a
			man of genius&#8217;: against which procedure he, in these
			Papers, loudly protests. &#8216;As if,&#8217; says he, &#8216;the
			higher did not presuppose the lower; as if he who can
			fly into heaven, could not also walk post if he resolved
			on it! But the world is an old woman, and mistakes
			any gilt farthing for a gold coin; whereby being often
			cheated, she will thenceforth trust nothing but the
			common copper.&#8217;</p>

			<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page95" name="page95"></a>95</span>How our winged sky-messenger, unaccepted as a
			terrestrial runner, contrived, in the mean while, to keep
			himself from flying skyward without return, is not too
			clear from these Documents. Good old Gretchen seems
			to have vanished from the scene, perhaps from the
			Earth; other Horn of Plenty, or even of Parsimony,
			nowhere flows for him; so that &#8216;the prompt nature of
			Hunger being well known,&#8217; we are not without our
			anxiety. From private Tuition, in never so many
			languages and sciences, the aid derivable is small;
			neither, to use his own words, &#8216;does the young Adventurer
			hitherto suspect in himself any literary gift; but
			at best earns bread-and-water wages, by his wide faculty
			of Translation. Nevertheless,&#8217; continues he, &#8216;that
			I subsisted is clear, for you find me even now alive.&#8217;
			Which fact, however, except upon the principle of our
			true-hearted, kind old Proverb, that &#8216;there is always
			life for a living one,&#8217; we must profess ourselves unable
			to explain.</p>

			<p>Certain Landlords&#8217; Bills, and other economic Documents,
			bearing the mark of Settlement, indicate that
			he was not without money; but, like an independent
			Hearth-holder, if not House-holder, paid his way. Here
			also occur, among many others, two little mutilated
			Notes, which perhaps throw light on his condition. The
			first has now no date, or writer&#8217;s name, but a huge
			Blot; and runs to this effect: &#8216;The (<i>Inkblot</i>), tied-down
			by previous promise, cannot, except by best
			wishes, forward the Herr Teufelsdröckh&#8217;s views on
			the Assessorship in question; and sees himself under
			the cruel necessity of forbearing, for the present,
			what were otherwise his duty and joy, to assist
			in opening the career for a man of genius, on whom
			far higher triumphs are yet waiting.&#8217; The other
			is on gilt paper; and interests us like a sort of epistolary
			mummy now dead, yet which once lived and beneficently
			worked. We give it in the original: &#8216;<i>Herr
			Teufelsdröckh wird von der Frau Gräfinn, auf Donnerstag,
			zum <span class="special_emphasis">Æsthetischen Thee</span> schönstens eingeladen.</i>&#8217;</p>

			<p>Thus, in answer to a cry for solid pudding, whereof
			there is the most urgent need, comes, epigrammatically
			enough, the invitation to a wash of quite fluid
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page96" name="page96"></a>96</span><em>Æsthetic Tea!</em> How Teufelsdröckh, now at actual
			handgrips with Destiny herself, may have comported
			himself among these Musical and Literary Dilettanti
			of both sexes, like a hungry lion invited to a feast of
			chickenweed, we can only conjecture. Perhaps in
			expressive silence, and abstinence: otherwise if the
			lion, in such case, is to feast at all, it cannot be on the
			chickenweed, but only on the chickens. For the rest,
			as this Frau Gräfinn dates from the <i>Zähdarm House</i>,
			she can be no other than the Countess and mistress of
			the same; whose intellectual tendencies, and good-will
			to Teufelsdröckh, whether on the footing of Herr Towgood,
			or on his own footing, are hereby manifest. That
			some sort of relation, indeed, continued, for a time, to
			connect our Autobiographer, though perhaps feebly
			enough, with this noble House, we have elsewhere
			express evidence. Doubtless, if he expected patronage,
			it was in vain; enough for him if he here obtained occasional
			glimpses of the great world, from which we at
			one time fancied him to have been always excluded.
			&#8216;The Zähdarms,&#8217; says he, &#8216;lived in the soft, sumptuous
			garniture of Aristocracy; whereto Literature and
			Art, attracted and attached from without, were to serve
			as the handsomest fringing. It was to the <i>Gnädigen
			Frau</i> (her Ladyship) that this latter improvement was
			due: assiduously she gathered, dextrously she fitted-on,
			what fringing was to be had; lace or cobweb, as
			the place yielded.&#8217; Was Teufelsdröckh also a fringe,
			of lace or cobweb; or promising to be such? &#8216;With
			his <i>Excellenz</i> (the Count),&#8217; continues he, &#8216;I have more
			than once had the honour to converse; chiefly on general
			affairs, and the aspect of the world, which he, though
			now past middle life, viewed in no unfavourable light;
			finding indeed, except the Outrooting of Journalism (<i>die
			auszurottende Journalistik</i>), little to desiderate therein.
			On some points, as his <i>Excellenz</i> was not uncholeric, I
			found it more pleasant to keep silence. Besides, his
			occupation being that of Owning Land, there might be
			faculties enough, which, as superfluous for such use,
			were little developed in him.&#8217;</p>

			<p>That to Teufelsdröckh the aspect of the world was
			nowise so faultless, and many things besides &#8216;the Outrooting
			of Journalism&#8217; might have seemed improvements,
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page97" name="page97"></a>97</span>we can readily conjecture. With nothing but
			a barren Auscultatorship from without, and so many
			mutinous thoughts and wishes from within, his position
			was no easy one. &#8216;The Universe,&#8217; he says, &#8216;was as
			a mighty Sphinx-riddle, which I knew so little of, yet
			must rede, or be devoured. In red streaks of unspeakable
			grandeur, yet also in the blackness of darkness,
			was Life, to my too-unfurnished Thought, unfolding
			itself. A strange contradiction lay in me; and I as yet
			knew not the solution of it; knew not that spiritual
			music can spring only from discords set in harmony;
			that but for Evil there were no Good, as victory is only
			possible by battle.&#8217;</p>

			<p>&#8216;I have heard affirmed (surely in jest),&#8217; observes he
			elsewhere, &#8216;by not unphilanthropic persons, that it
			were a real increase of human happiness, could all
			young men from the age of nineteen be covered under
			barrels, or rendered otherwise invisible; and there left
			to follow their lawful studies and callings, till they
			emerged, sadder and wiser, at the age of twenty-five.
			With which suggestion, at least as considered in the
			light of a practical scheme, I need scarcely say that I
			nowise coincide. Nevertheless it is plausibly urged
			that, as young ladies (<i>Mädchen</i>) are, to mankind, precisely
			the most delightful in those years; so young
			gentlemen (<i>Bübchen</i>) do then attain their maximum of
			detestability. Such gawks (<i>Gecken</i>) are they; and
			foolish peacocks, and yet with such a vulturous hunger
			for self-indulgence; so obstinate, obstreperous, vainglorious;
			in all senses, so froward and so forward. No
			mortal&#8217;s endeavour or attainment will, in the smallest,
			content the as yet unendeavouring, unattaining young
			gentleman; but he could make it all infinitely better,
			were it worthy of him. Life everywhere is the most
			manageable matter, simple as a question in the Rule-of-Three:
			multiply your second and third term together,
			divide the product by the first, and your quotient will
			be the answer,&#8212;which you are but an ass if you cannot
			come at. The booby has not yet found-out, by any
			trial, that, do what one will, there is ever a cursed
			fraction, oftenest a decimal repeater, and no net integer
			quotient so much as to be thought of.&#8217;</p>

			<p>In which passage does not there lie an implied confession
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page98" name="page98"></a>98</span>that Teufelsdröckh himself, besides his outward
			obstructions, had an inward, still greater, to contend
			with; namely, a certain temporary, youthful, yet still
			afflictive derangement of head? Alas, on the former
			side alone, his case was hard enough. &#8216;It continues
			ever true,&#8217; says he, &#8216;that Saturn, or Chronos, or what
			we call <span class="special_emphasis">Time</span>, devours all his Children: only by incessant
			Running, by incessant Working, may you (for
			some threescore-and-ten years) escape him; and you too
			he devours at last. Can any Sovereign, or Holy Alliance
			of Sovereigns, bid Time stand still; even in
			thought, shake themselves free of Time? Our whole
			terrestrial being is based on Time, and built of Time; it
			is wholly a Movement, a Time-impulse; Time is the
			author of it, the material of it. Hence also our Whole
			Duty, which is to move, to work,&#8212;in the right direction.
			Are not our Bodies and our Souls in continual
			movement, whether we will or not; in a continual
			Waste, requiring a continual Repair? Utmost satisfaction
			of our whole outward and inward Wants were
			but satisfaction for a space of Time; thus, whatso we
			have done, is done, and for us annihilated, and ever
			must we go and do anew. O Time-Spirit, how hast
			thou environed and imprisoned us, and sunk us so deep
			in thy troublous dim Time-Element, that only in lucid
			moments can so much as glimpses of our upper Azure
			Home be revealed to us! Me, however, as a Son of
			Time, unhappier than some others, was Time threatening
			to eat quite prematurely; for, strive as I might,
			there was no good Running, so obstructed was the path,
			so gyved were the feet.&#8217; That is to say, we presume,
			speaking in the dialect of this lower world, that Teufelsdröckh&#8217;s
			whole duty and necessity was, like other
			men&#8217;s, &#8216;to work,&#8212;in the right direction,&#8217; and that no
			work was to be had; whereby he became wretched
			enough. As was natural: with haggard Scarcity threatening
			him in the distance; and so vehement a soul
			languishing in restless inaction, and forced thereby, like
			Sir Hudibras&#8217;s sword by rust,</p>

			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>To eat into itself for lack</p>
					<p>Of something else to hew and hack!</p>
				</div>
			</div>

			<p>But on the whole, that same &#8216;excellent Passivity,&#8217;
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page99" name="page99"></a>99</span>as it has all along done, is here again vigorously
			flourishing; in which circumstance may we not trace
			the beginnings of much that now characterises our Professor;
			and perhaps, in faint rudiments, the origin of
			the Clothes-Philosophy itself? Already the attitude he
			has assumed towards the World is too defensive; not,
			as would have been desirable, a bold attitude of attack.
			&#8216;So far hitherto,&#8217; he says, &#8216;as I had mingled with
			mankind, I was notable, if for anything, for a certain
			stillness of manner, which, as my friends often rebukingly
			declared, did but ill express the keen ardour of
			my feelings. I, in truth, regarded men with an excess
			both of love and of fear. The mystery of a Person,
			indeed, is ever divine to him that has a sense for the
			God-like. Often, notwithstanding, was I blamed, and
			by half-strangers hated, for my so-called Hardness
			(<i>Härte</i>), my Indifferentism towards men; and the
			seemingly ironic tone I had adopted, as my favourite
			dialect in conversation. Alas, the panoply of Sarcasm
			was but as a buckram case, wherein I had striven to
			envelop myself; that so my own poor Person might live
			safe there, and in all friendliness, being no longer exasperated
			by wounds. Sarcasm I now see to be, in
			general, the language of the Devil; for which reason I
			have long since as good as renounced it. But how
			many individuals did I, in those days, provoke into
			some degree of hostility thereby! An ironic man, with
			his sly stillness, and ambuscading ways, more especially
			an ironic young man, from whom it is least expected,
			may be viewed as a pest to society. Have we not seen
			persons of weight and name coming forward, with
			gentlest indifference, to tread such a one out of sight,
			as an insignificancy and worm, start ceiling-high (<i>balkenhoch</i>),
			and thence fall shattered and supine, to be
			borne home on shutters, not without indignation, when
			he proved electric and a torpedo!&#8217;</p>

			<p>Alas, how can a man with this devilishness of temper
			make way for himself in Life; where the first problem,
			as Teufelsdröckh too admits, is &#8216;to unite yourself with
			some one and with somewhat (<i>sich anzuschliessen</i>)&#8217;?
			Division, not union, is written on most part of his
			procedure. Let us add too that, in no great length of
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page100" name="page100"></a>100</span>time, the only important connexion he had ever succeeded
			in forming, his connexion with the Zähdarm
			Family, seems to have been paralysed, for all practical
			uses, by the death of the &#8216;not uncholeric&#8217; old Count.
			This fact stands recorded, quite incidentally, in a certain
			<i>Discourse on Epitaphs</i>, huddled into the present
			Bag, among so much else; of which Essay the learning
			and curious penetration are more to be approved
			of than the spirit. His grand principle is, that lapidary
			inscriptions, of what sort soever, should be Historical
			rather than Lyrical. &#8216;By request of that worthy
			Nobleman&#8217;s survivors,&#8217; says he, &#8216;I undertook to compose
			his Epitaph; and not unmindful of my own rules,
			produced the following; which however, for an alleged
			defect of Latinity, a defect never yet fully visible to myself,
			still remains unengraven&#8217;;&#8212;wherein, we may
			predict, there is more than the Latinity that will surprise
			an English reader:</p>

			<div id="epitaph">
				<p>HIC JACET</p>

				<p class="epitaph_large">PHILIPPUS ZAEHDARM, COGNOMINE MAGNUS,</p>

				<p>ZAEHDARMI COMES,<br />
				EX IMPERII CONCILIO,<br />
				VELLERIS AUREI, PERISCELIDIS, NECNON VULTURIS NIGRI<br />
				EQUES.</p>

				<p>QUI DUM SUB LUNA AGEBAT,</p>

				<p class="epitaph_extra_large">QUINQUIES MILLE PERDICES</p>

				<p>PLUMBO CONFECIT:</p>

				<p class="epitaph_large">VARII CIBI</p>

				<p>CENTUMPONDIA MILLIES CENTENA MILLIA,<br />
				PER SE, PERQUE SERVOS QUADRUPEDES BIPEDESVE<br />
				HAUD SINE TUMULTU DEVOLVENS,</p>

				<p class="epitaph_large">IN STERCUS</p>

				<p>PALAM CONVERTIT.</p>

				<p>NUNC A LABORE REQUIESCENTEM<br />
				OPERA SEQUUNTUR.</p>

				<p>SI MONUMENTUM QUÆRIS,<br />
				FIMETUM ADSPICE.</p>

				<p>PRIMUM IN ORBE DEJECIT [<i>sub dato</i>]; POSTREMUM [<i>sub dato</i>].</p>

			</div>

		</div>
		<div id="book_2_chapter_5" class="chapter">
			<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page101" name="page101"></a>101</span></p>
			<p class="chapter_head">CHAPTER V</p>
			<h3 class="chapter_title">ROMANCE</h3>


			<p>&#8216;<span class="first_word">For</span> long years,&#8217; writes Teufelsdröckh, &#8216;had the
			poor Hebrew, in this Egypt of an Auscultatorship, painfully
			toiled, baking bricks without stubble, before ever
			the question once struck him with entire force: For
			what?&#8212;<i>Beym Himmel!</i> For Food and Warmth! And
			are Food and Warmth nowhere else, in the whole wide
			Universe, discoverable?&#8212;Come of it what might, I
			resolved to try.&#8217;</p>

			<p>Thus then are we to see him in a new independent
			capacity, though perhaps far from an improved one.
			Teufelsdröckh is now a man without Profession. Quitting
			the common Fleet of herring-busses and whalers,
			where indeed his leeward, laggard condition was painful
			enough, he desperately steers-off, on a course of his own,
			by sextant and compass of his own. Unhappy Teufelsdröckh!
			Though neither Fleet, nor Traffic, nor Commodores
			pleased thee, still was it not <em>a Fleet</em>, sailing
			in prescribed track, for fixed objects; above all, in combination,
			wherein, by mutual guidance, by all manner
			of loans and borrowings, each could manifoldly aid the
			other? How wilt thou sail in unknown seas; and for
			thyself find that shorter North-west Passage to thy fair
			Spice-country of a Nowhere?&#8212;A solitary rover, on such
			a voyage, with such nautical tactics, will meet with
			adventures. Nay, as we forthwith discover, a certain
			Calypso-Island detains him at the very outset; and as
			it were falsifies and oversets his whole reckoning.</p>

			<p>&#8216;If in youth,&#8217; writes he once, &#8216;the Universe is
			majestically unveiling, and everywhere Heaven revealing
			itself on Earth, nowhere to the Young Man does this
			Heaven on Earth so immediately reveal itself as in the
			Young Maiden. Strangely enough, in this strange life
			of ours, it has been so appointed. On the whole, as
			I have often said, a Person (<i>Persönlichkeit</i>) is ever holy
			to us: a certain orthodox Anthropomorphism connects
			my <em>Me</em> with all <em>Thees</em> in bonds of Love: but it is in
			this approximation of the Like and Unlike, that such
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page102" name="page102"></a>102</span>heavenly attraction, as between Negative and Positive,
			first burns-out into a flame. Is the pitifullest mortal
			Person, think you, indifferent to us? Is it not rather
			our heartfelt wish to be made one with him; to unite
			him to us, by gratitude, by admiration, even by fear;
			or failing all these, unite ourselves to him? But how
			much more, in this case of the Like-Unlike! Here is
			conceded us the higher mystic possibility of such a
			union, the highest in our Earth; thus, in the conducting
			medium of Fantasy, flames-forth that <em>fire</em>-development
			of the universal Spiritual Electricity, which, as
			unfolded between man and woman, we first emphatically
			denominate <span class="special_emphasis">Love</span>.</p>

			<p>&#8216;In every well-conditioned stripling, as I conjecture,
			there already blooms a certain prospective Paradise,
			cheered by some fairest Eve; nor, in the stately vistas,
			and flowerage and foliage of that Garden, is a Tree of
			Knowledge, beautiful and awful in the midst thereof,
			wanting. Perhaps too the whole is but the lovelier,
			if Cherubim and a Flaming Sword divide it from all
			footsteps of men; and grant him, the imaginative stripling,
			only the view, not the entrance. Happy season
			of virtuous youth, when shame is still an impassable
			celestial barrier; and the sacred air-cities of Hope have
			not shrunk into the mean clay-hamlets of Reality; and
			man, by his nature, is yet infinite and free!</p>

			<p>&#8216;As for our young Forlorn,&#8217; continues Teufelsdröckh,
			evidently meaning himself, &#8216;in his secluded
			way of life, and with his glowing Fantasy, the more
			fiery that it burnt under cover, as in a reverberating
			furnace, his feeling towards the Queens of this Earth
			was, and indeed is, altogether unspeakable. A visible
			Divinity dwelt in them; to our young Friend all women
			were holy, were heavenly. As yet he but saw them
			flitting past, in their many-coloured angel-plumage; or
			hovering mute and inaccessible on the outskirts of
			<i>Æsthetic Tea</i>: all of air they were, all Soul and Form;
			so lovely, like mysterious priestesses, in whose hand
			was the invisible Jacob&#8217;s-ladder, whereby man might
			mount into very Heaven. That he, our poor Friend,
			should ever win for himself one of these Gracefuls
			(<i>Holden</i>)&#8212;<i>Ach Gott!</i> how could he hope it; should he
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page103" name="page103"></a>103</span>not have died under it? There was a certain delirious
			vertigo in the thought.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Thus was the young man, if all-sceptical of Demons
			and Angels such as the vulgar had once believed in,
			nevertheless not unvisited by hosts of true Sky-born,
			who visibly and audibly hovered round him whereso he
			went; and they had that religious worship in his
			thought, though as yet it was by their mere earthly
			and trivial name that he named them. But now, if on
			a soul so circumstanced, some actual Air-maiden,
			incorporated into tangibility and reality, should cast
			any electric glance of kind eyes, saying thereby,
			&#8220;Thou too mayest love and be loved&#8221;; and so kindle
			him,&#8212;good Heaven, what a volcanic, earthquake-bringing,
			all-consuming fire were probably kindled!&#8217;</p>

			<p>Such a fire, it afterwards appears, did actually burst-forth,
			with explosions more or less Vesuvian, in the
			inner man of Herr Diogenes; as indeed how could it
			fail? A nature, which, in his own figurative style, we
			might say, had now not a little carbonised tinder, of
			Irritability; with so much nitre of latent Passion, and
			sulphurous Humour enough; the whole lying in such
			hot neighbourhood, close by &#8216;a reverberating furnace
			of Fantasy&#8217;: have we not here the components of
			driest Gunpowder, ready, on occasion of the smallest
			spark, to blaze-up? Neither, in this our Life-element,
			are sparks anywhere wanting. Without doubt, some
			Angel, whereof so many hovered round, would one day,
			leaving &#8216;the outskirts of <i>Æsthetic Tea</i>,&#8217; flit nigher;
			and, by electric Promethean glance, kindle no despicable
			firework. Happy, if it indeed proved a Firework,
			and flamed-off rocketwise, in successive beautiful bursts
			of splendour, each growing naturally from the other,
			through the several stages of a happy Youthful Love;
			till the whole were safely burnt-out; and the young
			soul relieved with little damage! Happy, if it did not
			rather prove a Conflagration and mad Explosion; painfully
			lacerating the heart itself; nay perhaps bursting
			the heart in pieces (which were Death); or at best,
			bursting the thin walls of your &#8216;reverberating furnace,&#8217;
			so that it rage thenceforth all unchecked among the
			contiguous combustibles (which were Madness): till
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page104" name="page104"></a>104</span>of the so fair and manifold internal world of our
			Diogenes, there remained Nothing, or only the &#8216;crater
			of an extinct volcano!&#8217;</p>

			<p>From multifarious Documents in this Bag <i>Capricornus</i>,
			and in the adjacent ones on both sides thereof,
			it becomes manifest that our philosopher, as stoical
			and cynical as he now looks, was heartily and even
			frantically in Love: here therefore may our old doubts
			whether his heart were of stone or of flesh give way.
			He loved once; not wisely but too well. And once only:
			for as your Congreve needs a new case or wrappage for
			every new rocket, so each human heart can properly
			exhibit but one Love, if even one; the &#8216;First Love
			which is infinite&#8217; can be followed by no second like
			unto it. In more recent years, accordingly, the Editor
			of these Sheets was led to regard Teufelsdröckh as a
			man not only who would never wed, but who would
			never even flirt; whom the grand-climacteric itself,
			and <i>St. Martin&#8217;s Summer</i> of incipient Dotage, would
			crown with no new myrtle-garland. To the Professor,
			women are henceforth Pieces of Art; of Celestial Art,
			indeed; which celestial pieces he glories to survey in
			galleries, but has lost thought of purchasing.</p>

			<p>Psychological readers are not without curiosity to
			see how Teufelsdröckh, in this for him unexampled
			predicament, demeans himself; with what specialties
			of successive configuration, splendour and colour, his
			Firework blazes-off. Small, as usual, is the satisfaction
			that such can meet with here. From amid these
			confused masses of Eulogy and Elegy, with their mad
			Petrarchan and Werterean ware lying madly scattered
			among all sorts of quite extraneous matter, not so much
			as the fair one&#8217;s name can be deciphered. For, without
			doubt, the title <i>Blumine</i>, whereby she is here designated,
			and which means simply Goddess of Flowers,
			must be fictitious. Was her real name Flora, then?
			But what was her surname, or had she none? Of
			what station in Life was she; of what parentage,
			fortune, aspect? Specially, by what Pre-established
			Harmony of occurrences did the Lover and the Loved
			meet one another in so wide a world; how did they
			behave in such meeting? To all which questions, not
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page105" name="page105"></a>105</span>unessential in a Biographic work, mere Conjecture must
			for most part return answer. &#8216;It was appointed,&#8217;
			says our Philosopher, &#8216;that the high celestial orbit of
			Blumine should intersect the low sublunary one of our
			Forlorn; that he, looking in her empyrean eyes, should
			fancy the upper Sphere of Light was come down into
			this nether sphere of Shadows; and finding himself
			mistaken, make noise enough.&#8217;</p>

			<p>We seem to gather that she was young, hazel-eyed,
			beautiful, and some one&#8217;s Cousin; highborn, and of
			high spirit; but unhappily dependent and insolvent;
			living, perhaps, on the not-too-gracious bounty of
			monied relatives. But how came &#8216;the Wanderer&#8217;
			into her circle? Was it by the humid vehicle of
			<i>Æsthetic Tea</i>, or by the arid one of mere Business?
			Was it on the hand of Herr Towgood; or of the Gnädige
			Frau, who, as ornamental Artist, might sometimes like
			to promote flirtation, especially for young cynical
			Nondescripts? To all appearance, it was chiefly by
			Accident, and the grace of Nature.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Thou fair Waldschloss,&#8217; writes our Autobiographer,
			&#8216;what stranger ever saw thee, were it even
			an absolved Auscultator, officially bearing in his pocket
			the last <i>Relatio ex Actis</i> he would ever write, but must
			have paused to wonder! Noble Mansion! There
			stoodest thou, in deep Mountain Amphitheatre, on
			umbrageous lawns, in thy serene solitude; stately,
			massive, all of granite; glittering in the western sunbeams,
			like a palace of El Dorado, overlaid with
			precious metal. Beautiful rose up, in wavy curvature,
			the slope of thy guardian Hills; of the greenest was
			their sward, embossed with its dark-brown frets of crag,
			or spotted by some spreading solitary Tree and its
			shadow. To the unconscious Wayfarer thou wert also
			as an Ammon&#8217;s Temple, in the Libyan Waste; where,
			for joy and woe, the tablet of his Destiny lay written.
			Well might he pause and gaze; in that glance of his
			were prophecy and nameless forebodings.&#8217;</p>

			<p>But now let us conjecture that the so presentient
			Auscultator has handed-in his <i>Relatio ex Actis</i>; been
			invited to a glass of Rhine-wine; and so, instead of
			returning dispirited and athirst to his dusty Town-home,
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page106" name="page106"></a>106</span>is ushered into the Gardenhouse, where sit the choicest
			party of dames and cavaliers: if not engaged in
			Æsthetic Tea, yet in trustful evening conversation, and
			perhaps Musical Coffee, for we hear of &#8216;harps and pure
			voices making the stillness live.&#8217; Scarcely, it would
			seem, is the Gardenhouse inferior in respectability to the
			noble Mansion itself. &#8216;Embowered amid rich foliage,
			rose-clusters, and the hues and odours of thousand
			flowers, here sat that brave company; in front, from
			the wide-opened doors, fair outlook over blossom and
			bush, over grove and velvet green, stretching, undulating
			onwards to the remote Mountain peaks: so bright,
			so mild, and everywhere the melody of birds and happy
			creatures: it was all as if man had stolen a shelter
			from the Sun in the bosom-vesture of Summer herself.
			How came it that the Wanderer advanced thither with
			such forecasting heart (<i>ahndungsvoll</i>), by the side of his
			gay host? Did he feel that to these soft influences his
			hard bosom ought to be shut; that here, once more,
			Fate had it in view to try him; to mock him, and see
			whether there were Humour in him?</p>

			<p>&#8216;Next moment he finds himself presented to the
			party; and especially by name to&#8212;Blumine! Peculiar
			among all dames and damosels glanced Blumine, there
			in her modesty, like a star among earthly lights.
			Noblest maiden! whom he bent to, in body and in soul;
			yet scarcely dared look at, for the presence filled him
			with painful yet sweetest embarrassment.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Blumine&#8217;s was a name well known to him; far
			and wide was the fair one heard of, for her gifts, her
			graces, her caprices: from all which vague colourings
			of Rumour, from the censures no less than from the
			praises, had our friend painted for himself a certain
			imperious Queen of Hearts, and blooming warm Earth-angel,
			much more enchanting than your mere white
			Heaven-angels of women, in whose placid veins circulates
			too little naphtha-fire. Herself also he had seen
			in public places; that light yet so stately form; those
			dark tresses, shading a face where smiles and sunlight
			played over earnest deeps: but all this he had seen only
			as a magic vision, for him inaccessible, almost without
			reality. Her sphere was too far from his; how should
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page107" name="page107"></a>107</span>she ever think of him; O Heaven! how should they so
			much as once meet together? And now that Rose-goddess
			sits in the same circle with him; the light of
			<em>her</em> eyes has smiled on him; if he speak, she will hear
			it! Nay, who knows, since the heavenly Sun looks
			into lowest valleys, but Blumine herself might have
			aforetime noted the so unnotable; perhaps, from his
			very gainsayers, as he had from hers, gathered wonder,
			gathered favour for him? Was the attraction, the
			agitation mutual, then; pole and pole trembling towards
			contact, when once brought into neighbourhood? Say
			rather, heart swelling in presence of the Queen of
			Hearts; like the Sea swelling when once near its Moon!
			With the Wanderer it was even so: as in heavenward
			gravitation, suddenly as at the touch of a Seraph&#8217;s
			wand, his whole soul is roused from its deepest recesses;
			and all that was painful and that was blissful there,
			dim images, vague feelings of a whole Past and a whole
			Future, are heaving in unquiet eddies within him.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Often, in far less agitating scenes, had our still
			Friend shrunk forcibly together; and shrouded-up his
			tremors and flutterings, of what sort soever, in a safe
			cover of Silence, and perhaps of seeming Stolidity.
			How was it, then, that here, when trembling to the
			core of his heart, he did not sink into swoons, but rose
			into strength, into fearlessness and clearness? It was
			his guiding Genius (<i>Dämon</i>) that inspired him; he must
			go forth and meet his Destiny. Show thyself now,
			whispered it, or be forever hid. Thus sometimes it is
			even when your anxiety becomes transcendental, that
			the soul first feels herself able to transcend it; that she
			rises above it, in fiery victory; and borne on new-found
			wings of victory, moves so calmly, even because
			so rapidly, so irresistibly. Always must the Wanderer
			remember, with a certain satisfaction and surprise, how
			in this case he sat not silent, but struck adroitly into
			the stream of conversation; which thenceforth, to speak
			with an apparent not a real vanity, he may say that he
			continued to lead. Surely, in those hours, a certain
			inspiration was imparted him, such inspiration as is
			still possible in our late era. The self-secluded unfolds
			himself in noble thoughts, in free, glowing words; his
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page108" name="page108"></a>108</span>soul is as one sea of light, the peculiar home of Truth
			and Intellect; wherein also Fantasy bodies-forth form
			after form, radiant with all prismatic hues.&#8217;</p>

			<p>It appears, in this otherwise so happy meeting, there
			talked one &#8216;Philistine&#8217;; who even now, to the general
			weariness, was dominantly pouring-forth Philistinism
			(<i>Philistriositäten</i>); little witting what hero was here
			entering to demolish him! We omit the series of
			Socratic, or rather Diogenic utterances, not unhappy in
			their way, whereby the monster, &#8216;persuaded into
			silence,&#8217; seems soon after to have withdrawn for the
			night. &#8216;Of which dialectic marauder,&#8217; writes our
			hero, &#8216;the discomfiture was visibly felt as a benefit by
			most: but what were all applauses to the glad smile,
			threatening every moment to become a laugh, wherewith
			Blumine herself repaid the victor? He ventured
			to address her, she answered with attention: nay what
			if there were a slight tremor in that silver voice; what
			if the red glow of evening were hiding a transient blush!</p>

			<p>&#8216;The conversation took a higher tone, one fine
			thought called forth another: it was one of those rare
			seasons, when the soul expands with full freedom, and
			man feels himself brought near to man. Gaily in light,
			graceful abandonment, the friendly talk played round
			that circle; for the burden was rolled from every heart;
			the barriers of Ceremony, which are indeed the laws
			of polite living, had melted as into vapour; and the poor
			claims of <em>Me</em> and <em>Thee</em>, no longer parted by rigid fences,
			now flowed softly into one another; and Life lay all
			harmonious, many-tinted, like some fair royal champaign,
			the sovereign and owner of which were Love
			only. Such music springs from kind hearts, in a kind
			environment of place and time. And yet as the light
			grew more aërial on the mountain-tops, and the shadows
			fell longer over the valley, some faint tone of sadness
			may have breathed through the heart; and, in whispers
			more or less audible, reminded every one that as this
			bright day was drawing towards its close, so likewise
			must the Day of Man&#8217;s Existence decline into dust and
			darkness; and with all its sick toilings, and joyful and
			mournful noises sink in the still Eternity.</p>

			<p>&#8216;To our Friend the hours seemed moments; holy
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page109" name="page109"></a>109</span>was he and happy: the words from those sweetest lips
			came over him like dew on thirsty grass; all better
			feelings in his soul seemed to whisper: It is good for us
			to be here. At parting, the Blumine&#8217;s hand was in his:
			in the balmy twilight, with the kind stars above them,
			he spoke something of meeting again, which was not
			contradicted; he pressed gently those small soft fingers,
			and it seemed as if they were not hastily, not angrily
			withdrawn.&#8217;</p>

			<p>Poor Teufelsdröckh! it is clear to demonstration
			thou art smit: the Queen of Hearts would see a &#8216;man
			of genius&#8217; also sigh for her; and there, by art-magic,
			in that preternatural hour, has she bound and spell-bound
			thee. &#8216;Love is not altogether a Delirium,&#8217;
			says he elsewhere; &#8216;yet has it many points in common
			therewith. I call it rather a discerning of the Infinite
			in the Finite, of the Idea made Real; which discerning
			again may be either true or false, either seraphic or
			demoniac, Inspiration or Insanity. But in the former
			case too, as in common Madness, it is Fantasy that
			superadds itself to sight; on the so petty domain of
			the Actual plants its Archimedes-lever, whereby to move
			at will the infinite Spiritual. Fantasy I might call the
			true Heaven-gate and Hell-gate of man: his sensuous
			life is but the small temporary stage (<i>Zeitbühne</i>), whereon
			thick-streaming influences from both these far yet
			near regions meet visibly, and act tragedy and melodrama.
			Sense can support herself handsomely, in most
			countries, for some eighteenpence a day; but for
			Fantasy planets and solar-systems will not suffice.
			Witness your Pyrrhus conquering the world, yet drinking
			no better red wine than he had before.&#8217; Alas!
			witness also your Diogenes, flame-clad, scaling the
			upper Heaven, and verging towards Insanity, for prize
			of a &#8216;high-souled Brunette,&#8217; as if the earth held but
			one and not several of these!</p>

			<p>He says that, in Town, they met again: &#8216;day after
			day, like his heart&#8217;s sun, the blooming Blumine shone
			on him. Ah! a little while ago, and he was yet in all
			darkness; him what Graceful (<i>Holde</i>) would ever love?
			Disbelieving all things, the poor youth had never learned
			to believe in himself. Withdrawn, in proud timidity,
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page110" name="page110"></a>110</span>within his own fastnesses; solitary from men, yet baited
			by night-spectres enough, he saw himself, with a sad
			indignation, constrained to renounce the fairest hopes
			of existence. And now, O now! &#8220;She looks on thee,&#8221;
			cried he: &#8220;she the fairest, noblest; do not her dark
			eyes tell thee, thou art not despised? The Heaven&#8217;s-Messenger!
			All Heaven&#8217;s blessings be hers!&#8221; Thus
			did soft melodies flow through his heart; tones of an
			infinite gratitude; sweetest intimations that he also was
			a man, that for him also unutterable joys had been
			provided.</p>

			<p>&#8216;In free speech, earnest or gay, amid lambent
			glances, laughter, tears, and often with the inarticulate
			mystic speech of Music: such was the element they
			now lived in; in such a many-tinted, radiant Aurora,
			and by this fairest of Orient Light-bringers must our
			Friend be blandished, and the new Apocalypse of Nature
			unrolled to him. Fairest Blumine! And, even as a
			Star, all Fire and humid Softness, a very Light-ray
			incarnate! Was there so much as a fault, a &#8220;caprice,&#8221;
			he could have dispensed with? Was she not to him in
			very deed a Morning-Star; did not her presence bring
			with it airs from Heaven? As from Æolian Harps in
			the breath of dawn, as from the Memnon&#8217;s Statue struck
			by the rosy finger of Aurora, unearthly music was around
			him, and lapped him into untried balmy Rest. Pale
			Doubt fled away to the distance; Life bloomed-up with
			happiness and hope. The past, then, was all a haggard
			dream; he had been in the Garden of Eden, then, and
			could not discern it! But lo now! the black walls of
			his prison melt away; the captive is alive, is free. If
			he loved his Disenchantress? <i>Ach Gott!</i> His whole
			heart and soul and life were hers, but never had he
			named it Love: existence was all a Feeling, not yet
			shaped into a Thought.&#8217;</p>

			<p>Nevertheless, into a Thought, nay into an Action, it
			must be shaped; for neither Disenchanter nor Disenchantress,
			mere &#8216;Children of Time,&#8217; can abide by
			Feeling alone. The Professor knows not, to this day,
			&#8216;how in her soft, fervid bosom the Lovely found determination,
			even on hest of Necessity, to cut-asunder these
			so blissful bonds.&#8217; He even appears surprised at the
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page111" name="page111"></a>111</span>&#8216;Duenna Cousin,&#8217; whoever she may have been, &#8216;in
			whose meagre, hunger-bitten philosophy, the religion
			of young hearts was, from the first, faintly approved
			of.&#8217; We, even at such distance, can explain it without
			necromancy. Let the Philosopher answer this one
			question: What figure, at that period, was a Mrs.
			Teufelsdröckh likely to make in polished society?
			Could she have driven so much as a brass-bound Gig,
			or even a simple iron-spring one? Thou foolish &#8216;absolved
			Auscultator,&#8217; before whom lies no prospect of
			capital, will any yet known &#8216;religion of young hearts&#8217;
			keep the human kitchen warm? Pshaw! thy divine
			Blumine when she &#8216;resigned herself to wed some
			richer,&#8217; shows more philosophy, though but &#8216;a woman
			of genius,&#8217; than thou, a pretended man.</p>

			<p>Our readers have witnessed the origin of this Love-mania,
			and with what royal splendour it waxes, and
			rises. Let no one ask us to unfold the glories of its
			dominant state; much less the horrors of its almost
			instantaneous dissolution. How from such inorganic
			masses, henceforth madder than ever, as lie in these
			Bags, can even fragments of a living delineation be
			organised? Besides, of what profit were it? We view,
			with a lively pleasure, the gay silk Montgolfier start
			from the ground, and shoot upwards, cleaving the liquid
			deeps, till it dwindle to a luminous star: but what is
			there to look longer on, when once, by natural elasticity,
			or accident of fire, it has exploded? A hapless air-navigator,
			plunging amid torn parachutes, sand-bags,
			and confused wreck, fast enough into the jaws of the
			Devil! Suffice it to know that Teufelsdröckh rose into
			the highest regions of the Empyrean, by a natural
			parabolic track, and returned thence in a quick perpendicular
			one. For the rest, let any feeling reader,
			who has been unhappy enough to do the like, paint it
			out for himself: considering only that if he, for his
			perhaps comparatively insignificant mistress, underwent
			such agonies and frenzies, what must Teufelsdröckh&#8217;s
			have been, with a fire-heart, and for a nonpareil
			Blumine! We glance merely at the final scene:</p>

			<p>&#8216;One morning, he found his Morning-Star all
			dimmed and dusky-red; the fair creature was silent,
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page112" name="page112"></a>112</span>absent, she seemed to have been weeping. Alas, no
			longer a Morning-star, but a troublous skyey Portent,
			announcing that the Doomsday had dawned! She said,
			in a tremulous voice, They were to meet no more.&#8217; The
			thunder-struck Air-sailor is not wanting to himself in
			this dread hour: but what avails it? We omit the
			passionate expostulations, entreaties, indignations, since
			all was vain, and not even an explanation was conceded
			him; and hasten to the catastrophe. &#8216;&#8220;Farewell,
			then, Madam!&#8221; said he, not without sternness, for his
			stung pride helped him. She put her hand in his, she
			looked in his face, tears started to her eyes: in wild
			audacity he clasped her to his bosom; their lips were
			joined, their two souls, like two dew-drops, rushed into
			one,&#8212;for the first time, and for the last!&#8217; Thus was
			Teufelsdröckh made immortal by a kiss. And then?
			Why, then&#8212;&#8216;thick curtains of Night rushed over his
			soul, as rose the immeasurable Crash of Doom; and
			through the ruins as of a shivered Universe was he
			falling, falling, towards the Abyss.&#8217;</p>

		</div>
		<div id="book_2_chapter_6" class="chapter">
			<p class="chapter_head">CHAPTER VI</p>
			<h3 class="chapter_title">SORROWS OF TEUFELSDRÖCKH</h3>

			<p><span class="first_word">We</span> have long felt that, with a man like our Professor,
			matters must often be expected to take a course of their
			own; that in so multiplex, intricate a nature, there
			might be channels, both for admitting and emitting, such
			as the Psychologist had seldom noted; in short, that
			on no grand occasion and convulsion, neither in the joy-storm
			nor in the woe-storm, could you predict his
			demeanour.</p>

			<p>To our less philosophical readers, for example, it is
			now clear that the so passionate Teufelsdröckh, precipitated
			through &#8216;a shivered Universe&#8217; in this extraordinary
			way, has only one of three things which he
			can next do: Establish himself in Bedlam; begin
			writing Satanic Poetry; or blow-out his brains. In the
			progress towards any of which consummations, do not
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page113" name="page113"></a>113</span>such readers anticipate extravagance enough; breast-beating,
			brow-beating (against walls), lion-bellowings of
			blasphemy and the like, stampings, smitings, breakages
			of furniture, if not arson itself?</p>

			<p>Nowise so does Teufelsdröckh deport him. He
			quietly lifts his <i>Pilgerstab</i> (Pilgrim-staff), &#8216;old business
			being soon wound-up&#8217;; and begins a perambulation
			and circumambulation of the terraqueous Globe!
			Curious it is, indeed, how with such vivacity of conception,
			such intensity of feeling, above all, with these
			unconscionable habits of Exaggeration in speech, he
			combines that wonderful stillness of his, that stoicism
			in external procedure. Thus, if his sudden bereavement,
			in this matter of the Flower-goddess, is talked
			of as a real Doomsday and Dissolution of Nature, in
			which light doubtless it partly appeared to himself, his
			own nature is nowise dissolved thereby; but rather is
			compressed closer. For once, as we might say, a
			Blumine by magic appliances has unlocked that shut
			heart of his, and its hidden things rush-out tumultuous,
			boundless, like genii enfranchised from their glass phial:
			but no sooner are your magic appliances withdrawn,
			than the strange casket of a heart springs-to again; and
			perhaps there is now no key extant that will open it;
			for a Teufelsdröckh, as we remarked, will not love a
			second time. Singular Diogenes! No sooner has that
			heart-rending occurrence fairly taken place, than he
			affects to regard it as a thing natural, of which there
			is nothing more to be said. &#8216;One highest hope, seemingly
			legible in the eyes of an Angel, had recalled him
			as out of Death-shadows into celestial Life: but a gleam
			of Tophet passed-over the face of his Angel; he was
			rapt away in whirlwinds, and heard the laughter of
			Demons. It was a Calenture,&#8217; adds he, &#8216;whereby the
			Youth saw green Paradise-groves in the waste Ocean-waters:
			a lying vision, yet not wholly a lie, for <em>he</em> saw
			it.&#8217; But what things soever passed in him, when he
			ceased to see it; what ragings and despairings soever
			Teufelsdröckh&#8217;s soul was the scene of, he has the goodness
			to conceal under a quite opaque cover of Silence.
			We know it well; the first mad paroxysm past, our
			brave Gneschen collected his dismembered philosophies,
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page114" name="page114"></a>114</span>and buttoned himself together; he was meek, silent, or
			spoke of the weather and the Journals: only by a transient
			knitting of those shaggy brows, by some deep
			flash of those eyes, glancing one knew not whether with
			tear-dew or with fierce fire,&#8212;might you have guessed
			what a Gehenna was within; that a whole Satanic
			School were spouting, though inaudibly, there. To
			consume your own choler, as some chimneys consume
			their own smoke; to keep a whole Satanic School spouting,
			if it must spout, inaudibly, is a negative yet no
			slight virtue, nor one of the commonest in these times.</p>

			<p>Nevertheless, we will not take upon us to say, that
			in the strange measure he fell upon, there was not a
			touch of latent Insanity; whereof indeed the actual condition
			of these Documents in <i>Capricornus</i> and <i>Aquarius</i>
			is no bad emblem. His so unlimited Wanderings, toilsome
			enough, are without assigned or perhaps assignable
			aim; internal Unrest seems his sole guidance; he
			wanders, wanders, as if that curse of the Prophet had
			fallen on him, and he were &#8216;made like unto a wheel.&#8217;
			Doubtless, too, the chaotic nature of these Paper-bags
			aggravates our obscurity. Quite without note of preparation,
			for example, we come upon the following slip:
			&#8216;A peculiar feeling it is that will rise in the Traveller,
			when turning some hill-range in his desert road, he
			descries lying far below, embosomed among its groves
			and green natural bulwarks, and all diminished to a
			toybox, the fair Town, where so many souls, as it were
			seen and yet unseen, are driving their multifarious
			traffic. Its white steeple is then truly a starward-pointing
			finger; the canopy of blue smoke seems like a sort
			of Life-breath: for always, of its own unity, the soul
			gives unity to whatsoever it looks on with love; thus
			does the little Dwelling place of men, in itself a congeries
			of houses and huts, become for us an individual,
			almost a person. But what thousand other thoughts
			unite thereto, if the place has to ourselves been the arena
			of joyous or mournful experiences; if perhaps the cradle
			we were rocked in still stands there, if our Loving ones
			still dwell there, if our Buried ones there slumber!&#8217;
			Does Teufelsdröckh, as the wounded eagle is said to
			make for its own eyrie, and indeed military deserters,
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page115" name="page115"></a>115</span>and all hunted outcast creatures, turn as if by instinct
			in the direction of their birthland,&#8212;fly first, in this extremity,
			towards his native Entepfuhl; but reflecting
			that there no help awaits him, take but one wistful look
			from the distance, and then wend elsewhither?</p>

			<p>Little happier seems to be his next flight: into the
			wilds of Nature; as if in her mother-bosom he would
			seek healing. So at least we incline to interpret the
			following Notice, separated from the former by some
			considerable space, wherein, however, is nothing noteworthy:</p>

			<p>&#8216;Mountains were not new to him; but rarely are
			Mountains seen in such combined majesty and grace as
			here. The rocks are of that sort called Primitive by the
			mineralogists, which always arrange themselves in
			masses of a rugged, gigantic character; which ruggedness,
			however, is here tempered by a singular airiness
			of form, and softness of environment: in a climate
			favourable to vegetation, the gray cliff, itself covered
			with lichens, shoots-up through a garment of foliage or
			verdure; and white, bright cottages, tree-shaded,
			cluster round the everlasting granite. In fine vicissitude,
			Beauty alternates with Grandeur: you ride
			through stony hollows, along straight passes, traversed
			by torrents, overhung by high walls of rock; now winding
			amid broken shaggy chasms, and huge fragments;
			now suddenly emerging into some emerald valley, where
			the streamlet collects itself into a Lake, and man has
			again found a fair dwelling, and it seems as if Peace
			had established herself in the bosom of Strength.</p>

			<p>&#8216;To Peace, however, in this vortex of existence, can
			the Son of Time not pretend: still less if some Spectre
			haunt him from the Past; and the future is wholly a
			Stygian Darkness, spectre-bearing. Reasonably might
			the Wanderer exclaim to himself: Are not the gates of
			this world&#8217;s happiness inexorably shut against thee;
			hast thou a hope that is not mad? Nevertheless, one
			may still murmur audibly, or in the original Greek if
			that suit better: &#8220;Whoso can look on Death will start
			at no shadows.&#8221;</p>

			<p>&#8216;From such meditations is the Wanderer&#8217;s attention
			called outwards; for now the Valley closes-in abruptly,
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page116" name="page116"></a>116</span>intersected by a huge mountain mass, the stony water-worn
			ascent of which is not to be accomplished on horseback.
			Arrived aloft, he finds himself again lifted into
			the evening sunset light; and cannot but pause, and
			gaze round him, some moments there. An upland
			irregular expanse of wold, where valleys in complex
			branchings are suddenly or slowly arranging their
			descent towards every quarter of the sky. The mountain-ranges
			are beneath your feet, and folded together:
			only the loftier summits look down here and there as
			on a second plain; lakes also lie clear and earnest in
			their solitude. No trace of man now visible; unless
			indeed it were he who fashioned that little visible link
			of Highway, here, as would seem, scaling the inaccessible,
			to unite Province with Province. But sunwards,
			lo you! how it towers sheer up, a world of Mountains,
			the diadem and centre of the mountain region! A
			hundred and a hundred savage peaks, in the last light
			of Day; all glowing, of gold and amethyst, like giant
			spirits of the wilderness; there in their silence, in their
			solitude, even as on the night when Noah&#8217;s Deluge first
			dried! Beautiful, nay solemn, was the sudden aspect
			to our Wanderer. He gazed over those stupendous
			masses with wonder, almost with longing desire; never
			till this hour had he known Nature, that she was One,
			that she was his Mother, and divine. And as the ruddy
			glow was fading into clearness in the sky, and the
			Sun had now departed, a murmur of Eternity and Immensity,
			of Death and of Life, stole through his soul;
			and he felt as if Death and Life were one, as if the
			Earth were not dead, as if the Spirit of the Earth had
			its throne in that splendour, and his own spirit were
			therewith holding communion.</p>

			<p>&#8216;The spell was broken by a sound of carriage-wheels.
			Emerging from the hidden Northward, to sink soon into
			the hidden Southward, came a gay Barouche-and-four:
			it was open; servants and postillions wore wedding-favours:
			that happy pair, then, had found each other,
			it was their marriage evening! Few moments brought
			them near: <i>Du Himmel!</i> It was Herr Towgood and&#8212;Blumine! With slight unrecognising salutation
			they passed me; plunged down amid the neighbouring
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page117" name="page117"></a>117</span>thickets, onwards, to Heaven, and to England; and I,
			in my friend Richter&#8217;s words, <em>I remained alone, behind
			them, with the Night</em>.&#8217;</p>

			<p>Were it not cruel in these circumstances, here might
			be the place to insert an observation, gleaned long ago
			from the great <i>Clothes-Volume</i>, where it stands with
			quite other intent: &#8216;Some time before Small-pox was
			extirpated,&#8217; says the Professor, &#8216;there came a new
			malady of the spiritual sort on Europe: I mean the
			epidemic, now endemical, of View-hunting. Poets of
			old date, being privileged with Senses, had also enjoyed
			external Nature; but chiefly as we enjoy the crystal cup
			which holds good or bad liquor for us; that is to say,
			in silence, or with slight incidental commentary: never,
			as I compute, till after the <i>Sorrows of Werter</i>, was
			there man found who would say: Come let us make
			a Description! Having drunk the liquor, come let us
			eat the glass! Of which endemic the Jenner is unhappily
			still to seek.&#8217; Too true!</p>

			<p>We reckon it more important to remark that the
			Professor&#8217;s Wanderings, so far as his stoical and cynical
			envelopment admits us to clear insight, here first take
			their permanent character, fatuous or not. That Basilisk-glance
			of the Barouche-and-four seems to have
			withered-up what little remnant of a purpose may have
			still lurked in him: Life has become wholly a dark
			labyrinth; wherein, through long years, our Friend,
			flying from spectres, has to stumble about at random,
			and naturally with more haste than progress.</p>

			<p>Foolish were it in us to attempt following him, even
			from afar, in this extraordinary world-pilgrimage of
			his; the simplest record of which, were clear record
			possible, would fill volumes. Hopeless is the obscurity,
			unspeakable the confusion. He glides from country to
			country, from condition to condition; vanishing and reappearing,
			no man can calculate how or where.
			Through all quarters of the world he wanders, and
			apparently through all circles of society. If in any
			scene, perhaps difficult to fix geographically, he settles
			for a time, and forms connexions, be sure he will snap
			them abruptly asunder. Let him sink out of sight as
			Private Scholar (<i>Privatisirender</i>), living by the grace of
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page118" name="page118"></a>118</span>God in some European capital, you may next find him
			as Hadjee in the neighbourhood of Mecca. It is an
			inexplicable Phantasmagoria, capricious, quick-changing;
			as if our Traveller, instead of limbs and high-ways,
			had transported himself by some wishing-carpet, or
			Fortunatus&#8217; Hat. The whole, too, imparted emblematically,
			in dim multifarious tokens (as that collection of
			Street-Advertisements); with only some touch of direct
			historical notice sparingly interspersed: little light-islets
			in the world of haze! So that, from this point,
			the Professor is more of an enigma than ever. In figurative
			language, we might say he becomes, not indeed
			a spirit, yet spiritualised, vaporised Fact unparalleled
			in Biography: The river of his History, which we have
			traced from its tiniest fountains, and hoped to see flow
			onward, with increasing current, into the ocean, here
			dashes itself over that terrific Lover&#8217;s Leap; and, as a
			mad-foaming cataract, flies wholly into tumultuous
			clouds of spray! Low down it indeed collects again
			into pools and plashes; yet only at a great distance, and
			with difficulty, if at all, into a general stream. To cast
			a glance into certain of those pools and plashes, and
			trace whither they run, must, for a chapter or two,
			form the limit of our endeavour.</p>

			<p>For which end doubtless those direct historical
			Notices, where they can be met with, are the best.
			Nevertheless, of this sort too there occurs much, which,
			with our present light, it were questionable to emit.
			Teufelsdröckh, vibrating everywhere between the highest
			and the lowest levels, comes into contact with public
			History itself. For example, those conversations and
			relations with illustrious Persons, as Sultan Mahmoud,
			the Emperor Napoleon, and others, are they not as yet
			rather of a diplomatic character than of a biographic?
			The Editor, appreciating the sacredness of crowned
			heads, nay perhaps suspecting the possible trickeries
			of a Clothes-Philosopher, will eschew this province for
			the present; a new time may bring new insight and a
			different duty.</p>

			<p>If we ask now, not indeed with what ulterior Purpose,
			for there was none, yet with what immediate outlooks;
			at all events, in what mood of mind, the Professor undertook
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page119" name="page119"></a>119</span>and prosecuted this world-pilgrimage,&#8212;the answer
			is more distinct than favourable. &#8216;A nameless Unrest,&#8217;
			says he, &#8216;urged me forward; to which the outward
			motion was some momentary lying solace.
			Whither should I go? My Loadstars were blotted out;
			in that canopy of grim fire shone no star. Yet forward
			must I; the ground burnt under me; there was no
			rest for the sole of my foot. I was alone, alone! Ever
			too the strong inward longing shaped Fantasms for
			itself: towards these, one after the other, must I fruitlessly
			wander. A feeling I had, that for my fever-thirst
			there was and must be somewhere a healing
			Fountain. To many fondly imagined Fountains, the
			Saints&#8217; Wells of these days, did I pilgrim; to great
			Men, to great Cities, to great Events: but found there
			no healing. In strange countries, as in the well-known;
			in savage deserts, as in the press of corrupt civilisation,
			it was ever the same: how could your Wanderer escape
			from&#8212;<em>his own Shadow</em>? Nevertheless still Forward!
			I felt as if in great haste; to do I saw not what. From
			the depths of my own heart, it called to me, Forwards!
			The winds and the streams, and all Nature sounded to
			me, Forwards! <i>Ach Gott</i>, I was even, once for all, a
			Son of Time.&#8217;</p>

			<p>From which is it not clear that the internal Satanic
			School was still active enough? He says elsewhere:
			&#8216;The <i>Enchiridion of Epictetus</i> I had ever with me, often
			as my sole rational companion; and regret to mention
			that the nourishment it yielded was trifling.&#8217; Thou
			foolish Teufelsdröckh! How could it else? Hadst
			thou not Greek enough to understand thus much: <i>The
			end of Man is an Action, and not a Thought</i>, though it
			were the noblest?</p>

			<p>&#8216;How I lived?&#8217; writes he once: &#8216;Friend, hast thou
			considered the &#8220;rugged all-nourishing Earth,&#8221; as Sophocles
			well names her; how she feeds the sparrow on the
			house-top, much more her darling, man? While thou
			stirrest and livest, thou hast a probability of victual.
			My breakfast of tea has been cooked by a Tartar woman,
			with water of the Amur, who wiped her earthen kettle
			with a horse-tail. I have roasted wild-eggs in the sand
			of Sahara; I have awakened in Paris <i>Estrapades</i> and
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page120" name="page120"></a>120</span>Vienna <i>Malzleins</i>, with no prospect of breakfast beyond
			elemental liquid. That I had my Living to seek saved
			me from Dying,&#8212;by suicide. In our busy Europe, is
			there not an everlasting demand for Intellect, in the
			chemical, mechanical, political, religious, educational,
			commercial departments? In Pagan countries, cannot
			one write Fetishes? Living! Little knowest thou what
			alchemy is in an inventive Soul; how, as with its little
			finger, it can create provision enough for the body (of a
			Philosopher); and then, as with both hands, create
			quite other than provision; namely, spectres to torment
			itself withal.&#8217;</p>

			<p>Poor Teufelsdröckh! Flying with Hunger always
			parallel to him; and a whole Infernal Chase in his rear;
			so that the countenance of Hunger is comparatively a
			friend&#8217;s! Thus must he, in the temper of ancient Cain,
			or of the modern Wandering Jew,&#8212;save only that he
			feels himself not guilty and but suffering the pains of
			guilt,&#8212;wend to and fro with aimless speed. Thus must
			he, over the whole surface of the Earth (by footprints),
			write his <i>Sorrows of Teufelsdröckh</i>; even as the great
			Goethe, in passionate words, had to write his <i>Sorrows
			of Werter</i>, before the spirit freed herself, and he could
			become a Man. Vain truly is the hope of your swiftest
			Runner to escape &#8216;from his own Shadow&#8217;! Nevertheless,
			in these sick days, when the Born of Heaven
			first descries himself (about the age of twenty) in a
			world such as ours, richer than usual in two things, in
			Truths grown obsolete, and Trades grown obsolete,&#8212;what
			can the fool think but that it is all a Den of Lies,
			wherein whoso will not speak Lies and act Lies, must
			stand idle and despair? Whereby it happens that, for
			your nobler minds, the publishing of some such Work
			of Art, in one or the other dialect, becomes almost a
			necessity. For what is it properly but an Altercation
			with the Devil, before you begin honestly Fighting him?
			Your Byron publishes his <i>Sorrows of Lord George</i>, in
			verse and in prose, and copiously otherwise: your
			Bonaparte represents his <i>Sorrows of Napoleon</i> Opera,
			in an all-too stupendous style; with music of cannon-volleys,
			and murder-shrieks of a world; his stage-lights
			are the fires of Conflagration; his rhyme and recitative
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page121" name="page121"></a>121</span>are the tramp of embattled Hosts and the sound of
			falling Cities.&#8212;Happier is he who, like our Clothes-Philosopher,
			can write such matter, since it must be
			written, on the insensible Earth, with his shoe-soles
			only; and also survive the writing thereof!</p>

		</div>
		<div id="book_2_chapter_7" class="chapter">
			<p class="chapter_head">CHAPTER VII</p>

			<h3 class="chapter_title">THE EVERLASTING NO</h3>

			<p><span class="first_word">Under</span> the strange nebulous envelopment, wherein
			our Professor has now shrouded himself, no doubt but
			his spiritual nature is nevertheless progressive, and
			growing: for how can the &#8216;Son of Time,&#8217; in any case,
			stand still? We behold him, through those dim years,
			in a state of crisis, of transition: his mad Pilgrimings,
			and general solution into aimless Discontinuity, what
			is all this but a mad Fermentation; wherefrom, the
			fiercer it is, the clearer product will one day evolve
			itself?</p>

			<p>Such transitions are ever full of pain: thus the Eagle
			when he moults is sickly; and, to attain his new beak,
			must harshly dash-off the old one upon rocks. What
			Stoicism soever our Wanderer, in his individual acts
			and motions, may affect, it is clear that there is a hot
			fever of anarchy and misery raging within; coruscations
			of which flash out: as, indeed, how could there be
			other? Have we not seen him disappointed, bemocked
			of Destiny, through long years? All that the young
			heart might desire and pray for has been denied; nay,
			as in the last worst instance, offered and then snatched
			away. Ever an &#8216;excellent Passivity&#8217;; but of useful,
			reasonable Activity, essential to the former as Food to
			Hunger, nothing granted: till at length, in this wild
			Pilgrimage, he must forcibly seize for himself an
			Activity, though useless, unreasonable. Alas, his cup
			of bitterness, which had been filling drop by drop, ever
			since that first &#8216;ruddy morning&#8217; in the Hinterschlag
			Gymnasium, was at the very lip; and then with that
			poison-drop, of the Towgood-and-Blumine business, it
			runs over, and even hisses over in a deluge of foam.</p>

			<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page122" name="page122"></a>122</span>He himself says once, with more justice than originality:
			&#8216;Man is, properly speaking, based upon Hope,
			he has no other possession but Hope; this world of his
			is emphatically the Place of Hope.&#8217; What, then, was
			our Professor&#8217;s possession? We see him, for the
			present, quite shut-out from Hope; looking not into the
			golden orient, but vaguely all round into a dim copper
			firmament, pregnant with earthquake and tornado.</p>

			<p>Alas, shut-out from Hope, in a deeper sense than
			we yet dream of! For, as he wanders wearisomely
			through this world, he has now lost all tidings of
			another and higher. Full of religion, or at least of
			religiosity, as our Friend has since exhibited himself,
			he hides not that, in those days, he was wholly irreligious:
			&#8216;Doubt had darkened into Unbelief,&#8217; says
			he; &#8216;shade after shade goes grimly over your soul, till
			you have the fixed, starless, Tartarean black.&#8217; To
			such readers as have reflected, what can be called
			reflecting, on man&#8217;s life, and happily discovered, in
			contradiction to much Profit-and-loss Philosophy, speculative
			and practical, that Soul is <em>not</em> synonymous with
			Stomach; who understand, therefore, in our Friend&#8217;s
			words, &#8216;that, for man&#8217;s well-being, Faith is properly
			the one thing needful; how, with it, Martyrs, otherwise
			weak, can cheerfully endure the shame and the cross;
			and without it, worldlings puke-up their sick existence,
			by suicide, in the midst of luxury&#8217;: to such it will be
			clear that, for a pure moral nature, the loss of his
			religious Belief was the loss of everything. Unhappy
			young man! All wounds, the crush of long-continued
			Destitution, the stab of false Friendship and of false
			Love, all wounds in thy so genial heart, would have
			healed again, had not its life-warmth been withdrawn.
			Well might he exclaim, in his wild way: &#8216;Is there no
			God, then; but at best an absentee God, sitting idle,
			ever since the first Sabbath, at the outside of his
			Universe, and <em>see</em>ing it go? Has the word Duty no
			meaning; is what we call Duty no divine Messenger
			and Guide, but a false earthly Fantasm, made-up of
			Desire and Fear, of emanations from the Gallows and
			from Dr. Graham&#8217;s Celestial-Bed? Happiness of an
			approving Conscience! Did not Paul of Tarsus, whom
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page123" name="page123"></a>123</span>admiring men have since named Saint, feel that <em>he</em> was
			&#8220;the chief of sinners&#8221;; and Nero of Rome, jocund in
			spirit (<i>wohlgemuth</i>), spend much of his time in fiddling?
			Foolish Word-monger and Motive-grinder, who in thy
			Logic-mill hast an earthly mechanism for the Godlike
			itself, and wouldst fain grind me out Virtue from the
			husks of Pleasure,&#8212;I tell thee, Nay! To the unregenerate
			Prometheus Vinctus of a man, it is ever the
			bitterest aggravation of his wretchedness that he is
			conscious of Virtue, that he feels himself the victim not
			of suffering only, but of injustice. What then? Is the
			heroic inspiration we name Virtue but some Passion;
			some bubble of the blood, bubbling in the direction
			others <em>profit</em> by? I know not: only this I know, If
			what thou namest Happiness be our true aim, then are
			we all astray. With Stupidity and sound Digestion
			man may front much. But what, in these dull unimaginative
			days, are the terrors of Conscience to the
			diseases of the Liver! Not on Morality, but on
			Cookery, let us build our stronghold: there brandishing
			our frying-pan, as censer, let us offer sweet incense to
			the Devil, and live at ease on the fat things <em>he</em> has
			provided for his Elect!&#8217;</p>

			<p>Thus has the bewildered Wanderer to stand, as so
			many have done, shouting question after question into
			the Sibyl-cave of Destiny, and receive no Answer but
			an Echo. It is all a grim Desert, this once-fair world
			of his; wherein is heard only the howling of wild-beasts,
			or the shrieks of despairing, hate-filled men; and no
			Pillar of Cloud by day, and no Pillar of Fire by night,
			any longer guides the Pilgrim. To such length has the
			spirit of Inquiry carried him. &#8216;But what boots it (<i>was
			thut&#8217;s</i>)?&#8217; cries he: &#8216;it is but the common lot in this
			era. Not having come to spiritual majority prior to the
			<i>Siècle de Louis Quinze</i>, and not being born purely a
			Loghead (<i>Dummkopf</i>), thou hadst no other outlook.
			The whole world is, like thee, sold to Unbelief; their
			old Temples of the Godhead, which for long have not
			been rainproof, crumble down; and men ask now:
			Where is the Godhead; our eyes never saw him?&#8217;</p>

			<p>Pitiful enough were it, for all these wild utterances,
			to call our Diogenes wicked. Unprofitable servants
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page124" name="page124"></a>124</span>as we all are, perhaps at no era of his life was he more
			decisively the Servant of Goodness, the Servant of God,
			than even now when doubting God&#8217;s existence. &#8216;One
			circumstance I note,&#8217; says he: &#8216;after all the nameless
			woe that Inquiry, which for me, what it is not always,
			was genuine Love of Truth, had wrought me, I nevertheless
			still loved Truth, and would bate no jot of my
			allegiance to her. &#8220;Truth&#8221;! I cried, &#8220;though the
			Heavens crush me for following her: no Falsehood!
			though a whole celestial Lubberland were the price of
			Apostasy.&#8221; In conduct it was the same. Had a divine
			Messenger from the clouds, or miraculous Handwriting
			on the wall, convincingly proclaimed to me <i>This thou
			shalt do</i>, with what passionate readiness, as I often
			thought, would I have done it, had it been leaping into
			the infernal Fire. Thus, in spite of all Motive-grinders,
			and Mechanical Profit-and-Loss Philosophies, with the
			sick ophthalmia and hallucination they had brought on,
			was the Infinite nature of Duty still dimly present to
			me: living without God in the world, of God&#8217;s light
			I was not utterly bereft; if my as yet sealed eyes, with
			their unspeakable longing, could nowhere see Him,
			nevertheless in my heart He was present, and His
			heaven-written Law still stood legible and sacred there.&#8217;</p>

			<p>Meanwhile, under all these tribulations, and temporal
			and spiritual destitutions, what must the Wanderer, in
			his silent soul, have endured! &#8216;The painfullest feeling,&#8217;
			writes he, &#8216;is that of your own Feebleness
			(<i>Unkraft</i>); ever, as the English Milton says, to be weak
			is the true misery. And yet of your Strength there is
			and can be no clear feeling, save by what you have
			prospered in, by what you have done. Between vague
			wavering Capability and fixed indubitable Performance,
			what a difference! A certain inarticulate Self-consciousness
			dwells dimly in us; which only our Works
			can render articulate and decisively discernible. Our
			Works are the mirror wherein the spirit first sees its
			natural lineaments. Hence, too, the folly of that impossible
			Precept, <em>Know thyself</em>; till it be translated into
			this partially possible one, <i>Know what thou canst
			work-at</i>.</p>

			<p>&#8216;But for me, so strangely unprosperous had I been,
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page125" name="page125"></a>125</span>the net-result of my Workings amounted as yet simply
			to&#8212;Nothing. How then could I believe in my Strength,
			when there was as yet no mirror to see it in? Ever
			did this agitating, yet, as I now perceive, quite frivolous
			question, remain to me insoluble: Hast thou a certain
			Faculty, a certain Worth, such even as the most have
			not; or art thou the completest Dullard of these modern
			times? Alas! the fearful Unbelief is unbelief in yourself;
			and how could I believe? Had not my first, last
			Faith in myself, when even to me the Heavens seemed
			laid open, and I dared to love, been all-too cruelly
			belied? The speculative Mystery of Life grew ever
			more mysterious to me: neither in the practical Mystery
			had I made the slightest progress, but been everywhere
			buffeted, foiled, and contemptuously cast-out. A feeble
			unit in the middle of a threatening Infinitude, I seemed
			to have nothing given me but eyes, whereby to discern
			my own wretchedness. Invisible yet impenetrable
			walls, as of Enchantment, divided me from all living:
			was there, in the wide world, any true bosom I could
			press trustfully to mine? O Heaven, No, there was
			none! I kept a lock upon my lips: why should I speak
			much with that shifting variety of so-called Friends,
			in whose withered, vain and too-hungry souls Friendship
			was but an incredible tradition? In such cases,
			your resource is to talk little, and that little mostly from
			the Newspapers. Now when I look back, it was a
			strange isolation I then lived in. The men and women
			around me, even speaking with me, were but Figures;
			I had, practically, forgotten that they were alive, that
			they were not merely automatic. In midst of their
			crowded streets and assemblages, I walked solitary;
			and (except as it was my own heart, not another&#8217;s, that
			I kept devouring) savage also, as the tiger in his jungle.
			Some comfort it would have been, could I, like a Faust,
			have fancied myself tempted and tormented of the
			Devil; for a Hell, as I imagine, without Life, though
			only diabolic Life, were more frightful: but in our age
			of Down-pulling and Disbelief, the very Devil has been
			pulled down, you cannot so much as believe in a Devil.
			To me the Universe was all void of Life, of Purpose,
			of Volition, even of Hostility: it was one huge, dead,
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page126" name="page126"></a>126</span>immeasurable Steam-engine, rolling on, in its dead
			indifference, to grind me limb from limb. O, the vast,
			gloomy, solitary Golgotha, and Mill of Death! Why
			was the Living banished thither companionless, conscious?
			Why, if there is no Devil; nay, unless the
			Devil is your God&#8217;?</p>

			<p>A prey incessantly to such corrosions, might not,
			moreover, as the worst aggravation to them, the iron
			constitution even of a Teufelsdröckh threaten to fail?
			We conjecture that he has known sickness; and, in
			spite of his locomotive habits, perhaps sickness of the
			chronic sort. Hear this, for example: &#8216;How beautiful
			to die of broken-heart, on Paper! Quite another thing
			in practice; every window of your Feeling, even of your
			Intellect, as it were, begrimed and mud-bespattered, so
			that no pure ray can enter; a whole Drugshop in your
			inwards; the fordone soul drowning slowly in quagmires
			of Disgust!&#8217;</p>

			<p>Putting all which external and internal miseries together,
			may we not find in the following sentences, quite
			in our Professor&#8217;s still vein, significance enough?
			&#8216;From Suicide a certain aftershine (<i>Nachschein</i>) of
			Christianity withheld me: perhaps also a certain indolence
			of character; for, was not that a remedy I had
			at any time within reach? Often, however, was there
			a question present to me: Should some one now, at
			the turning of that corner, blow thee suddenly out of
			Space, into the other World, or other No-World, by
			pistol-shot,&#8212;how were it? On which ground, too, I
			have often, in sea-storms and sieged cities and other
			death-scenes, exhibited an imperturbability, which
			passed, falsely enough, for courage.&#8217;</p>

			<p>&#8216;So had it lasted,&#8217; concludes the Wanderer, &#8216;so
			had it lasted, as in bitter protracted Death-agony,
			through long years. The heart within me, unvisited by
			any heavenly dewdrop, was smouldering in sulphurous,
			slow-consuming fire. Almost since earliest memory I
			had shed no tear; or once only when I, murmuring half-audibly,
			recited Faust&#8217;s Deathsong, that wild <i>Selig der
			den er im Siegesglanze findet</i> (Happy whom <em>he</em> finds in
			Battle&#8217;s splendour), and thought that of this last Friend
			even I was not forsaken, that Destiny itself could not
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page127" name="page127"></a>127</span>doom me not to die. Having no hope, neither had I
			any definite fear, were it of Man or of Devil: nay, I
			often felt as if it might be solacing, could the Arch-Devil
			himself, though in Tartarean terrors, but rise
			to me, that I might tell him a little of my mind. And
			yet, strangely enough, I lived in a continual, indefinite,
			pining fear; tremulous, pusillanimous, apprehensive of
			I knew not what: it seemed as if all things in the
			Heavens above and the Earth beneath would hurt me;
			as if the Heavens and the Earth were but boundless
			jaws of a devouring monster, wherein I, palpitating,
			waited to be devoured.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Full of such humour, and perhaps the miserablest
			man in the whole French Capital or Suburbs, was I,
			one sultry Dog-day, after much perambulation, toiling
			along the dirty little <i>Rue Saint-Thomas de l&#8217;Enfer</i>,
			among civic rubbish enough, in a close atmosphere, and
			over pavements hot as Nebuchadnezzar&#8217;s Furnace;
			whereby doubtless my spirits were little cheered; when,
			all at once, there rose a Thought in me, and I asked
			myself: &#8220;What <em>art</em> thou afraid of? Wherefore, like
			a coward, dost thou forever pip and whimper, and go
			cowering and trembling? Despicable biped! what is
			the sum-total of the worst that lies before thee?
			Death? Well, Death; and say the pangs of Tophet
			too, and all that the Devil and Man may, will or can do
			against thee! Hast thou not a heart; canst thou not
			suffer whatsoever it be; and, as a Child of Freedom,
			though outcast, trample Tophet itself under thy feet,
			while it consumes thee? Let it come, then; I will meet
			it and defy it!&#8221; And as I so thought, there rushed like
			a stream of fire over my whole soul; and I shook base
			Fear away from me forever. I was strong, of unknown
			strength; a spirit, almost a god. Ever from that time,
			the temper of my misery was changed: not Fear or
			whining Sorrow was it, but Indignation and grim fire-eyed
			Defiance.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Thus had the <span class="special_emphasis">Everlasting No</span> (<i>das ewige Nein</i>)
			pealed authoritatively through all the recesses of my
			Being, of my <span class="special_emphasis">Me</span>; and then was it that my whole <span class="special_emphasis">Me</span>
			stood up, in native God-created majesty, and with
			emphasis recorded its Protest. Such a Protest, the
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page128" name="page128"></a>128</span>most important transaction in Life, may that same
			Indignation and Defiance, in a psychological point of
			view, be fitly called. The Everlasting No had said:
			&#8220;Behold, thou are fatherless, outcast, and the Universe
			is mine (the Devil&#8217;s)&#8221;; to which my whole Me now
			made answer: &#8220;<em>I</em> am not thine, but Free, and forever
			hate thee!&#8221;</p>

			<p>&#8216;It is from this hour that I incline to date my
			Spiritual New-birth, or Baphometic Fire-baptism;
			perhaps I directly thereupon began to be a Man.&#8217;</p>

		</div>
		<div id="book_2_chapter_8" class="chapter">
			<p class="chapter_head">CHAPTER VIII</p>

			<h3 class="chapter_title">CENTRE OF INDIFFERENCE</h3>

			<p><span class="first_word">Though</span>, after this &#8216;Baphometic Fire-baptism&#8217; of
			his, our Wanderer signifies that his Unrest was but
			increased; as, indeed, &#8216;Indignation and Defiance,&#8217;
			especially against things in general, are not the most
			peaceable inmates; yet can the Psychologist surmise
			that it was no longer a quite hopeless Unrest; that
			henceforth it had at least a fixed centre to revolve round.
			For the fire-baptised soul, long so scathed and thunder-riven,
			here feels its own Freedom, which feeling is its
			Baphometic Baptism: the citadel of its whole kingdom
			it has thus gained by assault, and will keep inexpugnable;
			outwards from which the remaining dominions,
			not indeed without hard battling, will doubtless by
			degrees be conquered and pacificated. Under another
			figure, we might say, if in that great moment, in the <i>Rue
			Saint-Thomas de l&#8217;Enfer</i>, the old inward Satanic School
			was not yet thrown out of doors, it received peremptory
			judicial notice to quit;&#8212;whereby, for the rest, its howl-chantings,
			Ernulphus-cursings, and rebellious gnashings
			of teeth, might, in the meanwhile, become only the
			more tumultuous, and difficult to keep secret.</p>

			<p>Accordingly, if we scrutinise these Pilgrimings well,
			there is perhaps discernible henceforth a certain incipient
			method in their madness. Not wholly as a
			Spectre does Teufelsdröckh now storm through the
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page129" name="page129"></a>129</span>world; at worst as a spectre-fighting Man, nay who will
			one day be a Spectre-queller. If pilgriming restlessly
			to so many &#8216;Saints&#8217; Wells,&#8217; and ever without quenching
			of his thirst, he nevertheless finds little secular
			wells, whereby from time to time some alleviation is
			ministered. In a word, he is now, if not ceasing, yet
			intermitting to &#8216;eat his own heart&#8217;; and clutches
			round him outwardly on the <span class="special_emphasis">Not-me</span> for wholesomer
			food. Does not the following glimpse exhibit him in a
			much more natural state?</p>

			<p>&#8216;Towns also and Cities, especially the ancient, I
			failed not to look upon with interest. How beautiful
			to see thereby, as through a long vista, into the remote
			Time; to have, as it were, an actual section of almost
			the earliest Past brought safe into the Present, and set
			before your eyes! There, in that old City, was a live
			ember of Culinary Fire put down, say only two thousand
			years ago; and there, burning more or less triumphantly,
			with such fuel as the region yielded, it has burnt,
			and still burns, and thou thyself seest the very smoke
			thereof. Ah! and the far more mysterious live ember
			of Vital Fire was then also put down there; and still
			miraculously burns and spreads; and the smoke and
			ashes thereof (in these Judgment-Halls and Churchyards),
			and its bellows-engines (in these Churches), thou
			still seest; and its flame, looking out from every kind
			countenance, and every hateful one, still warms thee or
			scorches thee.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Of Man&#8217;s Activity and Attainment the chief results
			are aeriform, mystic, and preserved in Tradition only:
			such are his Forms of Government, with the Authority
			they rest on; his Customs, or Fashions both of Cloth-habits
			and of Soul-habits; much more his collective
			stock of Handicrafts, the whole Faculty he has acquired
			of manipulating Nature: all these things, as indispensable
			and priceless as they are, cannot in any way be
			fixed under lock and key, but must flit, spirit-like, on
			impalpable vehicles, from Father to Son; if you demand
			sight of them, they are nowhere to be met with. Visible
			Ploughmen and Hammermen there have been, ever
			from Cain and Tubalcain downwards: but where does
			your accumulated Agricultural, Metallurgic, and other
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page130" name="page130"></a>130</span>Manufacturing <span class="special_emphasis">Skill</span> lie warehoused? It transmits
			itself on the atmospheric air, on the sun&#8217;s rays (by
			Hearing and by Vision); it is a thing aeriform, impalpable,
			of quite spiritual sort. In like manner, ask me
			not, Where are the <span class="special_emphasis">Laws</span>; where is the <span class="special_emphasis">Government</span>?
			In vain wilt thou go to Schönbrunn, to Downing Street,
			to the Palais Bourbon: thou findest nothing there but
			brick or stone houses, and some bundles of Papers tied
			with tape. Where, then, is that same cunningly-devised
			almighty <span class="special_emphasis">Government</span> of theirs to be laid
			hands on? Everywhere, yet nowhere: seen only in its
			works, this too is a thing aeriform, invisible; or if
			you will, mystic and miraculous. So spiritual (<i>geistig</i>)
			is our whole daily Life: all that we do springs out of
			Mystery, Spirit, invisible Force; only like a little Cloud-image,
			or Armida&#8217;s Palace, air-built, does the Actual
			body itself forth from the great mystic Deep.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Visible and tangible products of the Past, again,
			I reckon-up to the extent of three: Cities, with their
			Cabinets and Arsenals; then tilled Fields, to either or
			to both of which divisions Roads with their Bridges
			may belong; and thirdly&#8212;&#8212;Books. In which third
			truly, the last invented, lies a worth far surpassing that
			of the two others. Wondrous indeed is the virtue of
			a true Book. Not like a dead city of stones, yearly
			crumbling, yearly needing repair; more like a tilled
			field, but then a spiritual field: like a spiritual tree, let
			me rather say, it stands from year to year, and from
			age to age (we have Books that already number some
			hundred-and-fifty human ages); and yearly comes its
			new produce of leaves (Commentaries, Deductions,
			Philosophical, Political Systems; or were it only
			Sermons, Pamphlets, Journalistic Essays), every one of
			which is talismanic and thaumaturgic, for it can persuade
			men. O thou who art able to write a Book,
			which once in the two centuries or oftener there is a
			man gifted to do, envy not him whom they name City-builder,
			and inexpressibly pity him whom they name
			Conqueror or City-burner! Thou too art a Conqueror
			and Victor: but of the true sort, namely over the Devil:
			thou too hast built what will outlast all marble and
			metal, and be a wonder-bringing City of the Mind, a
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page131" name="page131"></a>131</span>Temple and Seminary and Prophetic Mount, whereto
			all kindreds of the Earth will pilgrim.&#8212;Fool! why
			journeyest thou wearisomely, in thy antiquarian fervour,
			to gaze on the stone pyramids of Geeza, or the clay
			ones of Sacchara? These stand there, as I can tell
			thee, idle and inert, looking over the Desert, foolishly
			enough, for the last three-thousand years: but canst
			thou not open thy Hebrew <span class="special_emphasis">Bible</span>, then, or even
			Luther&#8217;s Version thereof?&#8217;</p>

			<p>No less satisfactory is his sudden appearance not in
			Battle, yet on some Battle-field; which, we soon gather,
			must be that of Wagram; so that here, for once, is a
			certain approximation to distinctness of date. Omitting
			much, let us impart what follows:</p>

			<p>&#8216;Horrible enough! A whole Marchfeld strewed
			with shell-splinters, cannon-shot, ruined tumbrils, and
			dead men and horses; stragglers still remaining not
			so much as buried. And those red mould heaps: ay,
			there lie the Shells of Men, out of which all the Life
			and Virtue has been blown; and now are they swept
			together, and crammed-down out of sight, like blown
			Egg-shells!&#8212;Did Nature, when she bade the Donau
			bring down his mould-cargoes from the Carinthian and
			Carpathian Heights, and spread them out here into the
			softest, richest level,&#8212;intend thee, O Marchfeld, for
			a corn-bearing Nursery, whereon her children might be
			nursed; or for a Cockpit, wherein they might the more
			commodiously be throttled and tattered? Were thy
			three broad Highways, meeting here from the ends of
			Europe, made for Ammunition-wagons, then? Were
			thy Wagrams and Stillfrieds but so many ready-built
			Casemates, wherein the house of Hapsburg might
			batter with artillery, and with artillery be battered?
			König Ottokar, amid yonder hillocks, dies under
			Rodolf&#8217;s truncheon; here Kaiser Franz falls a-swoon
			under Napoleon&#8217;s: within which five centuries, to omit
			the others, how has thy breast, fair Plain, been defaced
			and defiled! The greensward is torn-up and trampled-down;
			man&#8217;s fond care of it, his fruit-trees, hedgerows,
			and pleasant dwellings, blown-away with gunpowder;
			and the kind seedfield lies a desolate, hideous
			Place of Sculls.&#8212;Nevertheless, Nature is at work;
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page132" name="page132"></a>132</span>neither shall these Powder-Devilkins with their utmost
			devilry gainsay her: but all that gore and carnage will
			be shrouded-in, absorbed into manure; and next year
			the Marchfeld will be green, nay greener. Thrifty
			unwearied Nature, ever out of our great waste educing
			some little profit of thy own,&#8212;how dost thou, from
			the very carcass of the Killer, bring Life for the Living!</p>

			<p>&#8216;What, speaking in quite unofficial language, is the
			net-purport and upshot of war? To my own knowledge,
			for example, there dwell and toil, in the British
			village of Dumdrudge, usually some five-hundred souls.
			From these, by certain &#8220;Natural Enemies&#8221; of the
			French, there are successively selected, during the
			French war, say thirty able-bodied men: Dumdrudge,
			at her own expense, has suckled and nursed them: she
			has, not without difficulty and sorrow, fed them up to
			manhood, and even trained them to crafts, so that one
			can weave, another build, another hammer, and the
			weakest can stand under thirty stone avoirdupois.
			Nevertheless, amid much weeping and swearing, they
			are selected; all dressed in red; and shipped away, at
			the public charges, some two-thousand miles, or say
			only to the south of Spain; and fed there till wanted.
			And now to that same spot, in the south of Spain, are
			thirty similar French artisans, from a French Dumdrudge,
			in like manner wending: till at length, after
			infinite effort, the two parties come into actual juxtaposition;
			and Thirty stands fronting Thirty, each with
			a gun in his hand. Straightway the word &#8220;Fire!&#8221; is
			given: and they blow the souls out of one another; and
			in place of sixty brisk useful craftsmen, the world has
			sixty dead carcasses, which it must bury, and anew shed
			tears for. Had these men any quarrel? Busy as the
			Devil is, not the smallest! They lived far enough
			apart; were the entirest strangers; nay, in so wide a
			Universe, there was even, unconsciously, by Commerce,
			some mutual helpfulness between them. How then?
			Simpleton! their Governors had fallen-out; and, instead
			of shooting one another, had the cunning to make these
			poor blockheads shoot.&#8212;Alas, so is it in Deutschland,
			and hitherto in all other lands; still as of old, &#8220;what
			devilry soever Kings do, the Greeks must pay the
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page133" name="page133"></a>133</span>piper!&#8221;&#8212;In that fiction of the English Smollet, it is
			true, the final Cessation of War is perhaps prophetically
			shadowed forth; where the two Natural Enemies, in
			person, take each a Tobacco-pipe, filled with Brimstone;
			light the same, and smoke in one another&#8217;s
			faces, till the weaker gives in: but from such predicted
			Peace-Era, what blood-filled trenches, and contentious
			centuries, may still divide us!&#8217;</p>

			<p>Thus can the Professor, at least in lucid intervals,
			look away from his own sorrows, over the many-coloured
			world, and pertinently enough note what is
			passing there. We may remark, indeed, that for the
			matter of spiritual culture, if for nothing else, perhaps
			few periods of his life were richer than this. Internally,
			there is the most momentous instructive Course of
			Practical Philosophy, with Experiments, going on;
			towards the right comprehension of which his Peripatetic
			habits, favourable to Meditation, might help
			him rather than hinder. Externally, again, as he
			wanders to and fro, there are, if for the longing heart
			little substance, yet for the seeing eye sights enough:
			in these so boundless Travels of his, granting that the
			Satanic School was even partially kept down, what an
			incredible knowledge of our Planet, and its Inhabitants
			and their Works, that is to say, of all knowable things,
			might not Teufelsdröckh acquire!</p>

			<p>&#8216;I have read in most Public Libraries,&#8217; says he,
			&#8216;including those of Constantinople and Samarcand: in
			most Colleges, except the Chinese Mandarin ones, I
			have studied, or seen that there was no studying.
			Unknown Languages have I oftenest gathered from
			their natural repertory, the Air, by my organ of Hearing;
			Statistics, Geographics, Topographics came,
			through the Eye, almost of their own accord. The ways
			of Man, how he seeks food, and warmth, and protection
			for himself, in most regions, are ocularly known to me.
			Like the great Hadrian, I meted-out much of the terraqueous
			Globe with a pair of Compasses that belonged
			to myself only.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Of great Scenes why speak? Three summer days,
			I lingered reflecting, and even composing (<i>dichtete</i>), by
			the Pinechasms of Vaucluse; and in that clear Lakelet
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page134" name="page134"></a>134</span>moistened my bread. I have sat under the Palm-trees
			of Tadmor; smoked a pipe among the ruins of Babylon.
			The great Wall of China I have seen; and can testify
			that it is of gray brick, coped and covered with granite,
			and shows only second-rate masonry.&#8212;Great Events,
			also, have not I witnessed? Kings sweated-down
			(<i>ausgemergelt</i>) into Berlin-and-Milan Customhouse-Officers;
			the World well won, and the World well lost;
			oftener than once a hundred-thousand individuals shot
			(by each other) in one day. All kindreds and peoples
			and nations dashed together, and shifted and shovelled
			into heaps, that they might ferment there, and in time
			unite. The birth-pangs of Democracy, wherewith convulsed
			Europe was groaning in cries that reached
			Heaven, could not escape me.</p>

			<p>&#8216;For great Men I have ever had the warmest
			predilection; and can perhaps boast that few such in
			this era have wholly escaped me. Great Men are the
			inspired (speaking and acting) Texts of that divine
			<span class="special_emphasis">Book of Revelations</span>, whereof a Chapter is completed
			from epoch to epoch, and by some named <span class="special_emphasis">History</span>; to
			which inspired Texts your numerous talented men, and
			your innumerable untalented men, are the better or
			worse exegetic Commentaries, and wagonload of too-stupid,
			heretical or orthodox, weekly Sermons. For
			my study the inspired Texts themselves! Thus did
			not I, in very early days, having disguised me as
			tavern-waiter, stand behind the field-chairs, under that
			shady Tree at Treisnitz by the Jena Highway; waiting
			upon the great Schiller and greater Goethe; and hearing
			what I have not forgotten. For&#8212;&#8212;&#8217;</p>

			<p>&#8212;&#8212;But at this point the Editor recalls his principle
			of caution, some time ago laid down, and must suppress
			much. Let not the sacredness of Laurelled, still more,
			of Crowned Heads, be tampered with. Should we, at
			a future day, find circumstances altered, and the time
			come for Publication, then may these glimpses into the
			privacy of the Illustrious be conceded; which for the
			present were little better than treacherous, perhaps
			traitorous Eavesdroppings. Of Lord Byron, therefore,
			of Pope Pius, Emperor Tarakwang, and the &#8216;White
			Water-roses&#8217; (Chinese Carbonari) with their mysteries,
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page135" name="page135"></a>135</span>no notice here! Of Napoleon himself we shall only,
			glancing from afar, remark that Teufelsdröckh&#8217;s relation
			to him seems to have been of very varied character.
			At first we find our poor Professor on the point of being
			shot as a spy; then taken into private conversation,
			even pinched on the ear, yet presented with no money;
			at last indignantly dismissed, almost thrown out of
			doors, as an &#8216;Ideologist.&#8217; &#8216;He himself,&#8217; says the
			Professor, &#8216;was among the completest Ideologists, at
			least Ideopraxists: in the Idea (<i>in der Idee</i>) he lived,
			moved and fought. The man was a Divine Missionary,
			though unconscious of it; and preached, through the
			cannon&#8217;s throat, that great doctrine, <i>La carrière ouverte
			aux talens</i> (The Tools to him that can handle them),
			which is our ultimate Political Evangel, wherein alone
			can liberty lie. Madly enough he preached, it is true,
			as Enthusiasts and first Missionaries are wont, with
			imperfect utterance, amid much frothy rant; yet as articulately
			perhaps as the case admitted. Or call him,
			if you will, an American Backwoodsman, who had to
			fell unpenetrated forests, and battle with innumerable
			wolves, and did not entirely forbear strong liquor, rioting,
			and even theft; whom, notwithstanding, the peaceful
			Sower will follow, and, as he cuts the boundless
			harvest, bless.&#8217;</p>

			<p>More legitimate and decisively authentic is Teufelsdröckh&#8217;s
			appearance and emergence (we know not well
			whence) in the solitude of the North Cape, on that
			June Midnight. He has &#8216;a light-blue Spanish cloak&#8217;
			hanging round him, as his &#8216;most commodious, principal,
			indeed sole upper garment&#8217;; and stands there,
			on the World-promontory, looking over the infinite
			Brine, like a little blue Belfry (as we figure), now
			motionless indeed, yet ready, if stirred, to ring quaintest
			changes.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Silence as of death,&#8217; writes he; &#8216;for Midnight,
			even in the Arctic latitudes, has its character: nothing
			but the granite cliffs ruddy-tinged, the peaceable gurgle
			of that slow-heaving Polar Ocean, over which in the
			utmost North the great Sun hangs low and lazy, as
			if he too were slumbering. Yet is his cloud-couch
			wrought of crimson and cloth-of-gold; yet does his light
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page136" name="page136"></a>136</span>stream over the mirror of waters, like a tremulous fire-pillar,
			shooting downwards to the abyss, and hide itself
			under my feet. In such moments, Solitude also is
			invaluable; for who would speak, or be looked on, when
			behind him lies all Europe and Africa, fast asleep,
			except the watchmen; and before him the silent Immensity,
			and Palace of the Eternal, whereof our Sun is
			but a porch-lamp?</p>

			<p>&#8216;Nevertheless, in this solemn moment comes a man,
			or monster, scrambling from among the rock-hollows;
			and, shaggy, huge as the Hyperborean Bear, hails me in
			Russian speech: most probably, therefore, a Russian
			Smuggler. With courteous brevity, I signify my
			indifference to contraband trade, my humane intentions,
			yet strong wish to be private. In vain: the monster,
			counting doubtless on his superior stature, and minded
			to make sport for himself, or perhaps profit, were it
			with murder, continues to advance; ever assailing me
			with his importunate train-oil breath; and now has
			advanced, till we stand both on the verge of the rock,
			the deep Sea rippling greedily down below. What
			argument will avail? On the thick Hyperborean,
			cherubic reasoning, seraphic eloquence were lost. Prepared
			for such extremity, I, deftly enough, whisk
			aside one step; draw out, from my interior reservoirs,
			a sufficient Birmingham Horse-pistol, and say, &#8220;Be so
			obliging as retire, Friend (<i>Er ziehe sich zurück, Freund</i>),
			and with promptitude!&#8221; This logic even the Hyperborean
			understands; fast enough, with apologetic,
			petitionary growl, he sidles off; and, except for suicidal
			as well as homicidal purposes, need not return.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Such I hold to be the genuine use of Gunpowder:
			that it makes all men alike tall. Nay, if thou be cooler,
			cleverer than I, if thou have more <em>Mind</em>, though all but
			no Body whatever, then canst thou kill me first, and art
			the taller. Hereby, at last, is the Goliath powerless, and
			the David resistless; savage Animalism is nothing,
			inventive Spiritualism is all.</p>

			<p>&#8216;With respect to Duels, indeed, I have my own ideas.
			Few things, in this so surprising world, strike me with
			more surprise. Two little visual Spectra of men, hovering
			with insecure enough cohesion in the midst of the
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page137" name="page137"></a>137</span><span class="special_emphasis">Unfathomable</span>, and to dissolve therein, at any rate, very
			soon,&#8212;make pause at the distance of twelve paces
			asunder; whirl round; and, simultaneously by the cunningest
			mechanism, explode one another into Dissolution;
			and off-hand become Air, and Non-extant! Deuce
			on it (<i>verdammt</i>), the little spitfires!&#8212;Nay, I think
			with old Hugo von Trimberg: &#8220;God must needs laugh
			outright, could such a thing be, to see his wondrous
			Manikins here below.&#8221;&#8217;</p>

			<p class="post_thoughtbreak">But amid these specialties, let us not forget the great
			generality, which is our chief quest here: How prospered
			the inner man of Teufelsdröckh under so much
			outward shifting? Does Legion still lurk in him,
			though repressed; or has he exorcised that Devil&#8217;s
			Brood? We can answer that the symptoms continue
			promising. Experience is the grand spiritual Doctor;
			and with him Teufelsdröckh has now been long a
			patient, swallowing many a bitter bolus. Unless our
			poor Friend belong to the numerous class of Incurables,
			which seems not likely, some cure will doubtless be
			effected. We should rather say that Legion, or the
			Satanic School, was now pretty well extirpated and cast
			out, but next to nothing introduced in its room; whereby
			the heart remains, for the while, in a quiet but no
			comfortable state.</p>

			<p>&#8216;At length, after so much roasting,&#8217; thus writes our
			Autobiographer, &#8216;I was what you might name calcined.
			Pray only that it be not rather, as is the more
			frequent issue, reduced to a <i>caput-mortuum</i>! But in
			any case, by mere dint of practice, I had grown familiar
			with many things. Wretchedness was still wretched;
			but I could now partly see through it, and despise it.
			Which highest mortal, in this inane Existence, had I
			not found a Shadow-hunter, or Shadow-hunted; and,
			when I looked through his brave garnitures, miserable
			enough? Thy wishes have all been sniffed aside,
			thought I: but what, had they even been all granted!
			Did not the Boy Alexander weep because he had not
			two Planets to conquer; or a whole Solar System; or
			after that, a whole Universe? <i>Ach Gott</i>, when I gazed
			into these Stars, have they not looked down on me as
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page138" name="page138"></a>138</span>if with pity, from their serene spaces; like Eyes glistening
			with heavenly tears over the little lot of man!
			Thousands of human generations, all as noisy as our
			own, have been swallowed-up of Time, and there remains
			no wreck of them any more; and Arcturus and Orion
			and Sirius and the Pleiades are still shining in their
			courses, clear and young, as when the Shepherd first
			noted them in the plain of Shinar. Pshaw! what is
			this paltry little Dog-cage of an Earth; what art thou
			that sittest whining there? Thou art still Nothing,
			Nobody: true; but who, then, is Something, Somebody?
			For thee the Family of Man has no use; it
			rejects thee; thou art wholly as a dissevered limb: so
			be it; perhaps it is better so!&#8217;</p>

			<p>Too-heavy-laden Teufelsdröckh! Yet surely his
			bands are loosening; one day he will hurl the burden
			far from him, and bound forth free and with a second
			youth.</p>

			<p>&#8216;This,&#8217; says our Professor, &#8216;was the <span class="special_emphasis">Centre of
			Indifference</span> I had now reached; through which whoso
			travels from the Negative Pole to the Positive must
			necessarily pass.&#8217;</p>

		</div>
		<div id="book_2_chapter_9" class="chapter">
			<p class="chapter_head">CHAPTER IX</p>
			<h3 class="chapter_title">THE EVERLASTING YEA</h3>


			<p>&#8216;<span class="first_word">Temptations</span> in the Wilderness!&#8217; exclaims Teufelsdröckh:
			&#8216;Have we not all to be tried with such?
			Not so easily can the old Adam, lodged in us by birth,
			be dispossessed. Our Life is compassed round with
			Necessity; yet is the meaning of Life itself no other
			than Freedom, than Voluntary Force: thus have we a
			warfare; in the beginning, especially, a hard-fought
			battle. For the God-given mandate, <i>Work thou in
			Welldoing</i>, lies mysteriously written, in Promethean
			Prophetic Characters, in our hearts; and leaves us no
			rest, night or day, till it be deciphered and obeyed; till
			it burn forth, in our conduct, a visible, acted Gospel of
			Freedom. And as the clay-given mandate, <em>Eat thou
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page139" name="page139"></a>139</span>and be filled</em>, at the same time persuasively proclaims
			itself through every nerve,&#8212;must not there be a confusion,
			a contest, before the better Influence can become
			the upper?</p>

			<p>&#8216;To me nothing seems more natural than that the
			Son of Man, when such God-given mandate first prophetically
			stirs within him, and the Clay must now be
			vanquished, or vanquish,&#8212;should be carried of the spirit
			into grim Solitudes, and there fronting the Tempter do
			grimmest battle with him; defiantly setting him at
			naught, till he yield and fly. Name it as we choose:
			with or without visible Devil, whether in the natural
			Desert of rocks and sands, or in the populous moral
			Desert of selfishness and baseness,&#8212;to such Temptation
			are we all called. Unhappy if we are not! Unhappy
			if we are but Half-men, in whom that divine
			handwriting has never blazed forth, all-subduing, in
			true sun-splendour; but quivers dubiously amid meaner
			lights: or smoulders, in dull pain, in darkness, under
			earthly vapours!&#8212;Our Wilderness is the wide World
			in an Atheistic Century; our Forty Days are long years
			of suffering and fasting: nevertheless, to these also
			comes an end. Yes, to me also was given, if not
			Victory, yet the consciousness of Battle, and the resolve
			to persevere therein while life or faculty is left. To
			me also, entangled in the enchanted forests, demon-peopled,
			doleful of sight and of sound, it was given,
			after weariest wanderings, to work out my way into
			the higher sunlit slopes&#8212;of that Mountain which has
			no summit, or whose summit is in Heaven only!&#8217;</p>

			<p>He says elsewhere, under a less ambitious figure; as
			figures are, once for all, natural to him: &#8216;Has not
			thy Life been that of most sufficient men (<i>tüchtigen
			Männer</i>) thou hast known in this generation? An out-flush
			of foolish young Enthusiasm, like the first fallow-crop,
			wherein are as many weeds as valuable herbs:
			this all parched away, under the Droughts of practical
			and spiritual Unbelief, as Disappointment, in thought
			and act, often-repeated gave rise to Doubt, and Doubt
			gradually settled into Denial! If I have had a second-crop,
			and now see the perennial greensward, and sit
			under umbrageous cedars, which defy all Drought (and
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page140" name="page140"></a>140</span>Doubt); herein too, be the Heavens praised, I am not
			without examples, and even exemplars.&#8217;</p>

			<p>So that, for Teufelsdröckh also, there has been a
			&#8216;glorious revolution&#8217;: these mad shadow-hunting
			and shadow-hunted Pilgrimings of his were but some
			purifying &#8216;Temptation in the Wilderness,&#8217; before his
			Apostolic work (such as it was) could begin; which
			Temptation is now happily over, and the Devil once
			more worsted! Was &#8216;that high moment in the <i>Rue
			de l&#8217;Enfer</i>,&#8217; then, properly the turning-point of the
			battle; when the Fiend said, <em>Worship me or be torn
			in shreds</em>; and was answered valiantly with an <i>Apage
			Satana</i>?&#8212;Singular Teufelsdröckh, would thou hadst
			told thy singular story in plain words! But it is fruitless
			to look there, in those Paper-bags, for such. Nothing
			but innuendoes, figurative crotchets: a typical
			Shadow, fitfully wavering, prophetico-satiric; no clear
			logical Picture. &#8216;How paint to the sensual eye,&#8217; asks
			he once, &#8216;what passes in the Holy-of-Holies of Man&#8217;s
			Soul; in what words, known to these profane times,
			speak even afar-off of the unspeakable?&#8217; We ask in
			turn: Why perplex these times, profane as they are,
			with needless obscurity, by omission and by commission?
			Not mystical only is our Professor, but whimsical; and
			involves himself, now more than ever, in eye-bewildering
			<i>chiaroscuro</i>. Successive glimpses, here faithfully
			imparted, our more gifted readers must endeavour to
			combine for their own behoof.</p>

			<p>He says: &#8216;The hot Harmattan wind had raged itself
			out; its howl went silent within me; and the long-deafened
			soul could now hear. I paused in my wild
			wanderings; and sat me down to wait, and consider;
			for it was as if the hour of change drew nigh. I seemed
			to surrender, to renounce utterly, and say: Fly, then,
			false shadows of Hope; I will chase you no more, I
			will believe you no more. And ye too, haggard spectres
			of Fear, I care not for you; ye too are all shadows and
			a lie. Let me rest here: for I am way-weary and life-weary;
			I will rest here, were it but to die: to die or
			to live is alike to me; alike insignificant.&#8217;&#8212;And again:
			&#8216;Here, then, as I lay in that <span class="special_emphasis">Centre of Indifference</span>;
			cast, doubtless by benignant upper Influence, into a
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page141" name="page141"></a>141</span>healing sleep, the heavy dreams rolled gradually away,
			and I awoke to a new Heaven and a new Earth. The
			first preliminary moral Act, Annihilation of Self (<i>Selbst-tödtung</i>),
			had been happily accomplished; and my
			mind&#8217;s eyes were now unsealed, and its hands ungyved.&#8217;</p>

			<p>Might we not also conjecture that the following
			passage refers to his Locality, during this same &#8216;healing
			sleep&#8217;; that his Pilgrim-staff lies cast aside here,
			on &#8216;the high table-land&#8217;; and indeed that the repose
			is already taking wholesome effect on him? If it were
			not that the tone, in some parts, has more of riancy,
			even of levity, than we could have expected! However,
			in Teufelsdröckh, there is always the strangest Dualism:
			light dancing, with guitar-music, will be going
			on in the fore-court, while by fits from within comes
			the faint whimpering of woe and wail. We transcribe
			the piece entire:</p>

			<p>&#8216;Beautiful it was to sit there, as in my skyey Tent,
			musing and meditating; on the high table-land, in front
			of the Mountains; over me, as roof, the azure Dome,
			and around me, for walls, four azure-flowing curtains,&#8212;namely,
			of the Four azure winds, on whose bottom-fringes
			also I have seen gilding. And then to fancy the
			fair Castles that stood sheltered in these Mountain
			hollows; with their green flower-lawns, and white dames
			and damosels, lovely enough: or better still, the straw-roofed
			Cottages, wherein stood many a Mother baking
			bread, with her children round her:&#8212;all hidden and
			protectingly folded-up in the valley-folds; yet there
			and alive, as sure as if I beheld them. Or to see, as
			well as fancy, the nine Towns and Villages, that lay
			round my mountain-seat, which, in still weather, were
			wont to speak to me (by their steeple-bells) with metal
			tongue; and, in almost all weather, proclaimed their
			vitality by repeated Smoke-clouds; whereon, as on a
			culinary horologe, I might read the hour of the day.
			For it was the smoke of cookery, as kind housewives at
			morning, midday, eventide, were boiling their husbands&#8217;
			kettles; and ever a blue pillar rose up into the air,
			successively or simultaneously, from each of the nine,
			saying, as plainly as smoke could say: Such and such
			a meal is getting ready here. Not uninteresting! For
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page142" name="page142"></a>142</span>you have the whole Borough, with all its love-makings
			and scandal-mongeries, contentions and contentments,
			as in miniature, and could cover it all with your hat.&#8212;If,
			in my wide Wayfarings, I had learned to look into
			the business of the World in its details, here perhaps
			was the place for combining it into general propositions,
			and deducing inferences therefrom.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Often also could I see the black Tempest marching
			in anger through the Distance: round some Schreckhorn,
			as yet grim-blue, would the eddying vapour
			gather, and there tumultuously eddy, and flow down
			like a mad witch&#8217;s hair; till, after a space, it vanished,
			and, in the clear sunbeam, your Schreckhorn stood
			smiling grim-white, for the vapour had held snow.
			How thou fermentest and elaboratest, in thy great fermenting-vat
			and laboratory of an Atmosphere, of a
			World, O Nature!&#8212;Or what is Nature? Ha! why
			do I not name thee <span class="special_emphasis">God</span>? Art not thou the &#8220;Living
			Garment of God&#8221;? O Heavens, is it, in very deed,
			<span class="special_emphasis">He</span>, then, that ever speaks through thee; that lives
			and loves in thee, that lives and loves in me?</p>

			<p>&#8216;Fore-shadows, call them rather fore-splendours, of
			that Truth, and Beginning of Truths, fell mysteriously
			over my soul. Sweeter than Dayspring to the Shipwrecked
			in Nova Zembla; ah, like the mother&#8217;s voice
			to her little child that strays bewildered, weeping, in
			unknown tumults; like soft streamings of celestial
			music to my too-exasperated heart, came that Evangel.
			The Universe is not dead and demoniacal, a charnel-house
			with spectres; but godlike, and my Father&#8217;s!</p>

			<p>&#8216;With other eyes, too, could I now look upon my
			fellow man; with an infinite Love, an infinite Pity.
			Poor, wandering, wayward man! Art thou not tired,
			and beaten with stripes, even as I am? Ever, whether
			thou bear the royal mantle or the beggar&#8217;s gabardine,
			art thou not so weary, so heavy-laden; and thy Bed of
			Rest is but a Grave. O my Brother, my Brother, why
			cannot I shelter thee in my bosom, and wipe away all
			tears from thy eyes! Truly, the din of many-voiced
			Life, which, in this solitude, with the mind&#8217;s organ, I
			could hear, was no longer a maddening discord, but a
			melting one; like inarticulate cries, and sobbings of
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page143" name="page143"></a>143</span>a dumb creature, which in the ear of Heaven are prayers.
			The poor Earth, with her poor joys, was now my needy
			Mother, not my cruel Stepdame; Man, with his so mad
			Wants and so mean Endeavours, had become the dearer
			to me; and even for his sufferings and his sins, I now
			first named him Brother. Thus was I standing in the
			porch of that &#8220;<i>Sanctuary of Sorrow</i>;&#8221; by strange, steep
			ways had I too been guided thither; and ere long its
			sacred gates would open, and the &#8220;<i>Divine Depth of
			Sorrow</i>&#8221; lie disclosed to me.&#8217;</p>

			<p>The Professor says, he here first got eye on the Knot
			that had been strangling him, and straightway could
			unfasten it, and was free. &#8216;A vain interminable controversy,&#8217;
			writes he, &#8216;touching what is at present
			called Origin of Evil, or some such thing, arises in every
			soul, since the beginning of the world; and in every
			soul, that would pass from idle Suffering into actual
			Endeavouring, must first be put an end to. The most,
			in our time, have to go content with a simple, incomplete
			enough Suppression of this controversy; to a few
			some Solution of it is indispensable. In every new era,
			too, such Solution comes-out in different terms; and
			ever the Solution of the last era has become obsolete,
			and is found unserviceable. For it is man&#8217;s nature to
			change his Dialect from century to century; he cannot
			help it though he would. The authentic <i>Church-Catechism</i>
			of our present century has not yet fallen into my
			hands: meanwhile, for my own private behoof, I
			attempt to elucidate the matter so. Man&#8217;s Unhappiness,
			as I construe, comes of his Greatness; it is
			because there is an Infinite in him, which with all his
			cunning he cannot quite bury under the Finite. Will
			the whole Finance Ministers and Upholsterers and Confectioners
			of modern Europe undertake, in jointstock
			company, to make one Shoeblack <span class="special_emphasis_smaller">HAPPY</span>? They cannot
			accomplish it, above an hour or two; for the Shoeblack
			also has a Soul quite other than his Stomach; and
			would require, if you consider it, for his permanent
			satisfaction and saturation, simply this allotment, no
			more, and no less: <i>God&#8217;s infinite Universe altogether to
			himself</i>, therein to enjoy infinitely, and fill every wish
			as fast as it rose. Oceans of Hochheimer, a Throat
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page144" name="page144"></a>144</span>like that of Ophiuchus: speak not of them; to the
			infinite Shoeblack they are as nothing. No sooner is
			your ocean filled, than he grumbles that it might have
			been of better vintage. Try him with half of a Universe,
			of an Omnipotence, he sets to quarrelling with
			the proprietor of the other half, and declares himself
			the most maltreated of men.&#8212;Always there is a black
			spot in our sunshine: it is even as I said, the <i>Shadow
			of Ourselves</i>.</p>

			<p>&#8216;But the whim we have of Happiness is somewhat
			thus. By certain valuations, and averages, of our own
			striking, we come upon some sort of average terrestrial
			lot; this we fancy belongs to us by nature, and of indefeasible
			right. It is simple payment of our wages, of
			our deserts; requires neither thanks nor complaint; only
			such <em>overplus</em> as there may be do we account Happiness;
			any <em>deficit</em> again is Misery. Now consider that we have
			the valuation of our own deserts ourselves, and what
			a fund of Self-conceit there is in each of us,&#8212;do you
			wonder that the balance should so often dip the wrong
			way, and many a Blockhead cry: See there, what a
			payment; was ever worthy gentleman so used!&#8212;I tell
			thee, Blockhead, it all comes of thy Vanity; of what
			thou <em>fanciest</em> those same deserts of thine to be. Fancy
			that thou deservest to be hanged (as is most likely),
			thou wilt feel it happiness to be only shot: fancy that
			thou deservest to be hanged in a hair-halter, it will be
			a luxury to die in hemp.</p>

			<p>&#8216;So true is it, what I then say, that <i>the Fraction of
			Life can be increased in value not so much by increasing
			your Numerator as by lessening your Denominator</i>.
			Nay, unless my Algebra deceive me, <em>Unity</em> itself divided
			by <em>Zero</em> will give <em>Infinity</em>. Make thy claim of wages a
			zero, then; thou hast the world under thy feet. Well
			did the Wisest of our time write: &#8220;It is only with Renunciation
			(<i>Entsagen</i>) that Life, properly speaking, can
			be said to begin.&#8221;</p>

			<p>&#8216;I asked myself: What is this that, ever since
			earliest years, thou hast been fretting and fuming, and
			lamenting and self-tormenting, on account of? Say it
			in a word: is it not because thou art not <span class="special_emphasis_smaller">HAPPY</span>? Because
			the <span class="special_emphasis">Thou</span> (sweet gentleman) is not sufficiently
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page145" name="page145"></a>145</span>honoured, nourished, soft-bedded, and lovingly cared
			for? Foolish soul! What Act of Legislature was
			there that <em>thou</em> shouldst be Happy? A little while ago
			thou hadst no right to <em>be</em> at all. What if thou wert
			born and predestined not to be Happy, but to be Unhappy!
			Art thou nothing other than a Vulture, then,
			that fliest through the Universe seeking after somewhat
			to <em>eat</em>; and shrieking dolefully because carrion enough
			is not given thee? Close thy <em>Byron</em>; open thy <em>Goethe</em>.&#8217;</p>

			<p>&#8216;<i>Es leuchtet mir ein</i>, I see a glimpse of it!&#8217; cries he
			elsewhere: &#8216;there is in man a <span class="special_emphasis">Higher</span> than Love of
			Happiness: he can do without Happiness, and instead
			thereof find Blessedness! Was it not to preach-forth
			this same <span class="special_emphasis">Higher</span> that sages and martyrs, the Poet and
			the Priest, in all times, have spoken and suffered;
			bearing testimony, through life and through death, of
			the Godlike that is in Man, and how in the Godlike
			only has he Strength and Freedom? Which God-inspired
			Doctrine art thou also honoured to be taught;
			O Heavens! and broken with manifold merciful Afflictions,
			even till thou become contrite, and learn it! O,
			thank thy Destiny for these; thankfully bear what yet
			remain: thou hadst need of them; the Self in thee
			needed to be annihilated. By benignant fever-paroxysms
			is Life rooting out the deep-seated chronic
			Disease, and triumphs over Death. On the roaring
			billows of Time, thou art not engulfed, but borne aloft
			into the azure of Eternity. Love not Pleasure; love
			God. This is the <span class="special_emphasis">Everlasting Yea</span>, wherein all contradiction
			is solved: wherein whoso walks and works,
			it is well with him.&#8217;</p>

			<p>And again: &#8216;Small is it that thou canst trample
			the Earth with its injuries under thy feet, as old Greek
			Zeno trained thee: thou canst love the Earth while it
			injures thee, and even because it injures thee; for this
			a Greater than Zeno was needed, and he too was sent.
			Knowest thou that &#8220;<i>Worship of Sorrow</i>&#8221;? The Temple
			thereof, founded some eighteen centuries ago, now lies
			in ruins, overgrown with jungle, the habitation of doleful
			creatures: nevertheless, venture forward; in a low crypt,
			arched out of falling fragments, thou findest the Altar
			still there, and its sacred Lamp perennially burning.&#8217;</p>

			<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page146" name="page146"></a>146</span>Without pretending to comment on which strange
			utterances, the Editor will only remark, that there lies
			beside them much of a still more questionable character;
			unsuited to the general apprehension; nay wherein he
			himself does not see his way. Nebulous disquisitions
			on Religion, yet not without bursts of splendour; on
			the &#8216;perennial continuance of Inspiration;&#8217; on Prophecy;
			that there are &#8216;true Priests, as well as Baal-Priests,
			in our own day:&#8217; with more of the like sort.
			We select some fractions, by way of finish to this
			farrago.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Cease, my much-respected Herr von Voltaire,&#8217; thus
			apostrophises the Professor: &#8216;shut thy sweet voice;
			for the task appointed thee seems finished. Sufficiently
			hast thou demonstrated this proposition, considerable
			or otherwise: That the Mythus of the Christian Religion
			looks not in the eighteenth century as it did in the
			eighth. Alas, were thy six-and-thirty quartos, and the
			six-and-thirty thousand other quartos and folios, and
			flying sheets or reams, printed before and since on the
			same subject, all needed to convince us of so little!
			But what next? Wilt thou help us to embody the
			divine Spirit of that Religion in a new Mythus, in a
			new vehicle and vesture, that our Souls, otherwise too
			like perishing, may live? What! thou hast no faculty
			in that kind? Only a torch for burning, no hammer
			for building? Take our thanks, then, and&#8212;thyself
			away.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Meanwhile what are antiquated Mythuses to me?
			Or is the God present, felt in my own heart, a thing
			which Herr von Voltaire will dispute out of me; or
			dispute into me? To the &#8220;<i>Worship of Sorrow</i>&#8221; ascribe
			what origin and genesis thou pleasest, <em>has</em> not that
			Worship originated, and been generated; is it not
			<em>here</em>? Feel it in thy heart, and then say whether it is
			of God! This is Belief; all else is Opinion,&#8212;for which
			latter whoso will let him worry and be worried.&#8217;</p>

			<p>&#8216;Neither,&#8217; observes he elsewhere, &#8216;shall ye tear-out
			one another&#8217;s eyes, struggling over &#8220;Plenary Inspiration,&#8221;
			and suchlike: try rather to get a little even
			Partial Inspiration, each of you for himself. One
			<span class="special_emphasis">Bible</span> I know, of whose Plenary Inspiration doubt is not
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page147" name="page147"></a>147</span>so much as possible; nay with my own eyes I saw the
			God&#8217;s-Hand writing it: thereof all other Bibles are but
			leaves,&#8212;say, in Picture-Writing to assist the weaker
			faculty.&#8217;</p>

			<p>Or, to give the wearied reader relief, and bring
			it to an end, let him take the following perhaps more
			intelligible passage:</p>

			<p>&#8216;To me, in this our life,&#8217; says the Professor, &#8216;which
			is an internecine warfare with the Time-spirit, other
			warfare seems questionable. Hast thou in any way a
			Contention with thy brother, I advise thee, think well
			what the meaning thereof is. If thou gauge it to the
			bottom, it is simply this: &#8220;Fellow, see! thou art
			taking more than thy share of Happiness in the world,
			something from <em>my</em> share: which, by the Heavens, thou
			shall not; nay I will fight thee rather.&#8221;&#8212;Alas, and the
			whole lot to be divided is such a beggarly matter, truly a
			&#8220;feast of shells,&#8221; for the substance has been spilled out:
			not enough to quench one Appetite; and the collective
			human species clutching at them!&#8212;Can we not, in all
			such cases, rather say: &#8220;Take it, thou too-ravenous
			individual; take that pitiful additional fraction of a
			share, which I reckoned mine, but which thou so wantest;
			take it with a blessing: would to Heaven I had
			enough for thee!&#8221;&#8212;If Fichte&#8217;s <i>Wissenschaftslehre</i> be,
			&#8220;to a certain extent, Applied Christianity,&#8221; surely to a
			still greater extent, so is this. We have here not a
			Whole Duty of Man, yet a Half Duty, namely the
			Passive half: could we but do it, as we can demonstrate
			it!</p>

			<p>&#8216;But indeed Conviction, were it never so excellent,
			is worthless till it convert itself into Conduct. Nay
			properly Conviction is not possible till then; inasmuch
			as all Speculation is by nature endless, formless, a vortex
			amid vortices: only by a felt indubitable certainty of
			Experience does it find any centre to revolve round, and
			so fashion itself into a system. Most true is it, as a
			wise man teaches us, that &#8220;Doubt of any sort cannot
			be removed except by Action.&#8221; On which ground, too,
			let him who gropes painfully in darkness or uncertain
			light, and prays vehemently that the dawn may ripen
			into day, lay this other precept well to heart, which to
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page148" name="page148"></a>148</span>me was of invaluable service: &#8220;<i>Do the Duty which lies
			nearest thee</i>,&#8221; which thou knowest to be a Duty! Thy
			second Duty will already have become clearer.</p>

			<p>&#8216;May we not say, however, that the hour of Spiritual
			Enfranchisement is even this: When your Ideal World,
			wherein the whole man has been dimly struggling and
			inexpressibly languishing to work, becomes revealed,
			and thrown open; and you discover, with amazement
			enough, like the Lothario in <i>Wilhelm Meister</i>, that your
			&#8220;America is here or nowhere&#8221;? The Situation that has
			not its Duty, its Ideal, was never yet occupied by man.
			Yes here, in this poor, miserable, hampered, despicable
			Actual, wherein thou even now standest, here or nowhere
			is thy Ideal: work it out therefrom; and working,
			believe, live, be free. Fool! the Ideal is in thyself, the
			impediment too is in thyself: thy Condition is but the
			stuff thou art to shape that same Ideal out of: what
			matters whether such stuff be of this sort or that, so
			the Form thou give it be heroic, be poetic? O thou
			that pinest in the imprisonment of the Actual, and criest
			bitterly to the gods for a kingdom wherein to rule and
			create, know this of a truth: the thing thou seekest is
			already with thee, &#8220;here or nowhere,&#8221; couldst thou
			only see!</p>

			<p>&#8216;But it is with man&#8217;s Soul as it was with Nature:
			the beginning of Creation is&#8212;Light. Till the eye have
			vision, the whole members are in bonds. Divine
			moment, when over the tempest-tost Soul, as once over
			the wild-weltering Chaos, it is spoken: Let there be
			Light! Ever to the greatest that has felt such moment,
			is it not miraculous and God-announcing; even as, under
			simpler figures, to the simplest and least. The mad
			primeval Discord is hushed; the rudely-jumbled conflicting
			elements bind themselves into separate Firmaments:
			deep silent rock-foundations are built beneath; and the
			skyey vault with its everlasting Luminaries above: instead
			of a dark wasteful Chaos, we have a blooming,
			fertile, heaven-encompassed World.</p>

			<p>&#8216;I too could now say to myself: Be no longer a
			Chaos, but a World, or even Worldkin. Produce!
			Produce! Were it but the pitifullest infinitesimal
			fraction of a Product, produce it, in God&#8217;s name! &#8216;Tis
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page149" name="page149"></a>149</span>the utmost thou hast in thee: out with it, then. Up,
			up! Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with
			thy whole might. Work while it is called Today; for
			the Night cometh, wherein no man can work.&#8217;</p>

		</div>
		<div id="book_2_chapter_10" class="chapter">
			<p class="chapter_head">CHAPTER X</p>

			<h3 class="chapter_title">PAUSE</h3>

			<p><span class="first_word">Thus</span> have we, as closely and perhaps satisfactorily
			as, in such circumstances, might be, followed Teufelsdröckh
			through the various successive states and stages
			of Growth, Entanglement, Unbelief, and almost Reprobation,
			into a certain clearer state of what he himself
			seems to consider as Conversion. &#8216;Blame not the
			word,&#8217; says he; &#8216;rejoice rather that such a word,
			signifying such a thing, has come to light in our modern
			Era, though hidden from the wisest Ancients. The Old
			World knew nothing of Conversion; instead of an <i>Ecce
			Homo</i>, they had only some <i>Choice of Hercules</i>. It was
			a new-attained progress in the Moral Development of
			man: hereby has the Highest come home to the bosoms
			of the most Limited; what to Plato was but a hallucination,
			and to Socrates a chimera, is now clear and certain
			to your Zinzendorfs, your Wesleys, and the poorest of
			their Pietists and Methodists.&#8217;</p>

			<p>It is here, then, that the spiritual majority of Teufelsdröckh
			commences: we are henceforth to see him &#8216;work
			in well-doing,&#8217; with the spirit and clear aims of a Man.
			He has discovered that the Ideal Workshop he so panted
			for is even this same Actual ill-furnished Workshop
			he has so long been stumbling in. He can say to himself:
			&#8216;Tools? Thou hast no Tools? Why, there is
			not a Man, or a Thing, now alive but has tools. The
			basest of created animalcules, the Spider itself, has a
			spinning-jenny, and warping-mill, and power-loom within
			its head: the stupidest of Oysters has a Papin&#8217;s-Digester,
			with stone-and-lime house to hold it in: every
			being that can live can do something: this let him
			<em>do</em>.&#8212;Tools? Hast thou not a Brain, furnished, furnishable
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page150" name="page150"></a>150</span>with some glimmerings of Light; and three fingers
			to hold a Pen withal? Never since Aaron&#8217;s Rod went
			out of practice, or even before it, was there such a
			wonder-working Tool: greater than all recorded
			miracles have been performed by Pens. For strangely
			in this so solid-seeming World, which nevertheless is in
			continual restless flux, it is appointed that <em>Sound</em>, to
			appearance the most fleeting, should be the most continuing
			of all things. The <span class="special_emphasis">Word</span> is well said to be
			omnipotent in this world; man, thereby divine, can
			create as by a <em>Fiat</em>. Awake, arise! Speak forth what
			is in thee; what God has given thee, what the Devil
			shall not take away. Higher task than that of Priesthood
			was allotted to no man: wert thou but the meanest
			in that sacred Hierarchy, is it not honour enough therein
			to spend and be spent?</p>

			<p>&#8216;By this Art, which whoso will may sacrilegiously
			degrade into a handicraft,&#8217; adds Teufelsdröckh, &#8216;have
			I thenceforth abidden. Writings of mine, not indeed
			known as mine (for what am <em>I</em>?), have fallen, perhaps
			not altogether void, into the mighty seed-field of
			Opinion; fruits of my unseen sowing gratifyingly meet
			me here and there. I thank the Heavens that I have
			now found my Calling; wherein, with or without perceptible
			result, I am minded diligently to persevere.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Nay how knowest thou,&#8217; cries he, &#8216;but this and
			the other pregnant Device, now grown to be a world-renowned
			far-working Institution; like a grain of right
			mustard-seed once cast into the right soil, and now
			stretching-out strong boughs to the four winds, for the
			birds of the air to lodge in,&#8212;may have been properly
			my doing? Some one&#8217;s doing, it without doubt was;
			from some Idea, in some single Head, it did first of all
			take beginning: why not from some Idea in mine?&#8217;
			Does Teufelsdröckh here glance at that &#8216;<span class="special_emphasis">Society for
			the Conservation of Property</span> (<i>Eigenthums-conservirende
			Gesellschaft</i>),&#8217; of which so many ambiguous
			notices glide spectre-like through these inexpressible
			Paper-bags? &#8216;An Institution,&#8217; hints he, &#8216;not unsuitable
			to the wants of the time; as indeed such sudden
			extension proves: for already can the Society number,
			among its office-bearers or corresponding members, the
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page151" name="page151"></a>151</span>highest Names, if not the highest Persons, in Germany,
			England, France; and contributions, both of money
			and of meditation, pour-in from all quarters; to, if
			possible, enlist the remaining Integrity of the world,
			and, defensively and with forethought, marshal it round
			this Palladium.&#8217; Does Teufelsdröckh mean, then, to
			give himself out as the originator of that so notable
			<i>Eigenthums-conservirende</i> (&#8216;Owndom-conserving&#8217;)
			<i>Gesellschaft</i>; and if so, what, in the Devil&#8217;s name, is
			it? He again hints: &#8216;At a time when the divine
			Commandment, <em>Thou shalt not steal</em>, wherein truly, if
			well understood, is comprised the whole Hebrew Decalogue,
			with Solon&#8217;s and Lycurgus&#8217;s Constitutions,
			Justinian&#8217;s Pandects, the Code Napoléon, and all Codes,
			Catechisms, Divinities, Moralities whatsoever, that man
			has hitherto devised (and enforced with Altar-fire and
			Gallows-ropes) for his social guidance: at a time, I
			say, when this divine Commandment has all-but faded
			away from the general remembrance; and, with little
			disguise, a new opposite Commandment, <i>Thou shalt
			steal</i>, is everywhere promulgated,&#8212;it perhaps behooved,
			in this universal dotage and deliration, the sound portion
			of mankind to bestir themselves and rally. When the
			widest and wildest violations of that divine right of
			Property, the only divine right now extant or conceivable,
			are sanctioned and recommended by a vicious
			Press, and the world has lived to hear it asserted that
			<i>we have no Property in our very Bodies, but only an
			accidental Possession and Life-rent</i>, what is the issue
			to be looked for? Hangmen and Catchpoles may, by
			their noose-gins and baited fall-traps, keep-down the
			smaller sort of vermin; but what, except perhaps some
			such Universal Association, can protect us against whole
			meat-devouring and man-devouring hosts of Boa-constrictors?
			If, therefore, the more sequestered Thinker
			have wondered, in his privacy, from what hand that
			perhaps not ill-written <i>Program</i> in the Public Journals,
			with its high <i>Prize-Questions</i> and so liberal <i>Prizes</i>, could
			have proceeded,&#8212;let him now cease such wonder; and,
			with undivided faculty, betake himself to the <i>Concurrenz</i>
			(Competition).&#8217;</p>

			<p>We ask: Has this same &#8216;perhaps not ill-written
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page152" name="page152"></a>152</span><i>Program</i>,&#8217; or any other authentic Transaction of that
			Property-conserving Society, fallen under the eye of the
			British Reader, in any Journal foreign or domestic?
			If so, what are those <i>Prize-Questions</i>; what are the
			terms of Competition, and when and where? No
			printed Newspaper-leaf, no farther light of any sort, to
			be met with in these Paper-bags! Or is the whole
			business one other of those whimsicalities and perverse
			inexplicabilities, whereby Herr Teufelsdröckh, meaning
			much or nothing, is pleased so often to play fast-and-loose
			with us?</p>

			<p class="post_thoughtbreak">Here, indeed, at length, must the Editor give utterance
			to a painful suspicion, which, through late
			Chapters, has begun to haunt him; paralysing any
			little enthusiasm that might still have rendered his
			thorny Biographical task a labour of love. It is a suspicion
			grounded perhaps on trifles, yet confirmed almost
			into certainty by the more and more discernible humoristico-satirical
			tendency of Teufelsdröckh, in whom
			underground humours and intricate sardonic rogueries,
			wheel within wheel, defy all reckoning: a suspicion, in
			one word, that these Autobiographical Documents are
			partly a mystification! What if many a so-called Fact
			were little better than a Fiction; if here we had no direct
			Camera-obscura Picture of the Professor&#8217;s History; but
			only some more or less fantastic Adumbration, symbolically,
			perhaps significantly enough, shadowing-forth the
			same! Our theory begins to be that, in receiving as
			literally authentic what was but hieroglyphically so,
			Hofrath Heuschrecke, whom in that case we scruple not
			to name Hofrath Nose-of-Wax, was made a fool of,
			and set adrift to make fools of others. Could it be
			expected, indeed, that a man so known for impenetrable
			reticence as Teufelsdröckh, would all at once frankly
			unlock his private citadel to an English Editor and a
			German Hofrath; and not rather deceptively <em>in</em>lock
			both Editor and Hofrath in the labyrinthic tortuosities
			and covered-ways of said citadel (having enticed them
			thither), to see, in his half-devilish way, how the fools
			would look?</p>

			<p>Of one fool, however, the Herr Professor will perhaps
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page153" name="page153"></a>153</span>find himself short. On a small slip, formerly
			thrown aside as blank, the ink being all-but invisible,
			we lately notice, and with effort decipher, the following:
			&#8216;What are your historical Facts; still more your biographical?
			Wilt thou know a Man, above all a Mankind,
			by stringing-together beadrolls of what thou
			namest Facts? The Man is the spirit he worked in;
			not what he did, but what he became. Facts are
			engraved Hierograms, for which the fewest have the
			key. And then how your Blockhead (<i>Dummkopf</i>)
			studies not their Meaning; but simply whether they
			are well or ill cut, what he calls Moral or Immoral!
			Still worse is it with your Bungler (<i>Pfuscher</i>): such I
			have seen reading some Rousseau, with pretences of
			interpretation; and mistaking the ill-cut Serpent-of-Eternity
			for a common poisonous reptile.&#8217; Was the
			Professor apprehensive lest an Editor, selected as the
			present boasts himself, might mistake the Teufelsdröckh
			Serpent-of-Eternity in like manner? For which
			reason it was to be altered, not without underhand satire,
			into a plainer Symbol? Or is this merely one of his
			half-sophisms, half-truisms, which if he can but set on
			the back of a Figure, he cares not whither it gallop?
			We say not with certainty; and indeed, so strange is
			the Professor, can never say. If our suspicion be
			wholly unfounded, let his own questionable ways, not
			our necessary circumspectness, bear the blame.</p>

			<p>But be this as it will, the somewhat exasperated and
			indeed exhausted Editor determines here to shut these
			Paper-bags for the present. Let it suffice that we know
			of Teufelsdröckh, so far, if &#8216;not what he did, yet what
			he became:&#8217; the rather, as his character has now taken
			its ultimate bent, and no new revolution, of importance,
			is to be looked for. The imprisoned Chrysalis is
			now a winged Psyche: and such, wheresoever be its
			flight, it will continue. To trace by what complex
			gyrations (flights or involuntary waftings) through the
			mere external Life element, Teufelsdröckh reaches his
			University Professorship, and the Psyche clothes herself
			in civic Titles, without altering her now fixed nature,&#8212;would
			be comparatively an unproductive task, were we
			even unsuspicious of its being, for us at least, a false
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page154" name="page154"></a>154</span>and impossible one. His outward Biography, therefore,
			which, at the Blumine Lover&#8217;s-Leap, we saw churned
			utterly into spray-vapour, may hover in that condition,
			for aught that concerns us here. Enough that by survey
			of certain &#8216;pools and plashes,&#8217; we have ascertained
			its general direction; do we not already know
			that, by one way and other, it <em>has</em> long since rained-down
			again into a stream; and even now, at Weissnichtwo,
			flows deep and still, fraught with the <i>Philosophy
			of Clothes</i>, and visible to whoso will cast eye thereon?
			Over much invaluable matter, that lies scattered, like
			jewels among quarry-rubbish, in those Paper-catacombs
			we may have occasion to glance back, and somewhat
			will demand insertion at the right place: meanwhile be
			our tiresome diggings therein suspended.</p>

			<p>If now, before reopening the great <i>Clothes-Volume</i>,
			we ask what our degree of progress, during these Ten
			Chapters, has been, towards right understanding of
			the <i>Clothes-Philosophy</i>, let not our discouragement become
			total. To speak in that old figure of the Hell-gate
			Bridge over Chaos, a few flying pontoons have
			perhaps been added, though as yet they drift straggling
			on the Flood; how far they will reach, when once the
			chains are straightened and fastened, can, at present,
			only be matter of conjecture.</p>

			<p>So much we already calculate: Through many a little
			loop-hole, we have had glimpses into the internal world
			of Teufelsdröckh; his strange mystic, almost magic
			Diagram of the Universe, and how it was gradually
			drawn, is not henceforth altogether dark to us. Those
			mysterious ideas on <span class="special_emphasis">Time</span>, which merit consideration,
			and are not wholly unintelligible with such, may by and
			by prove significant. Still more may his somewhat
			peculiar view of Nature, the decisive Oneness he ascribes
			to Nature. How all Nature and Life are but one <em>Garment</em>,
			a &#8216;Living Garment,&#8217; woven and ever a-weaving
			in the &#8216;Loom of Time;&#8217; is not here, indeed, the outline
			of a whole <i>Clothes-Philosophy</i>; at least the arena
			it is to work in? Remark, too, that the Character of
			the Man, nowise without meaning in such a matter, becomes
			less enigmatic: amid so much tumultuous obscurity,
			almost like diluted madness, do not a certain
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page155" name="page155"></a>155</span>indomitable Defiance and yet a boundless Reverence
			seem to loom-forth, as the two mountain-summits, on
			whose rock-strata all the rest were based and built?</p>

			<p>Nay further, may we not say that Teufelsdröckh&#8217;s
			Biography, allowing it even, as suspected, only a hieroglyphical
			truth, exhibits a man, as it were preappointed
			for Clothes-Philosophy? To look through the Shows
			of things into Things themselves he is led and compelled.
			The &#8216;Passivity&#8217; given him by birth is fostered
			by all turns of his fortune. Everywhere cast out, like
			oil out of water, from mingling in any Employment, in
			any public Communion, he has no portion but Solitude,
			and a life of Meditation. The whole energy of his existence
			is directed, through long years, on one task: that
			of enduring pain, if he cannot cure it. Thus everywhere
			do the Shows of things oppress him, withstand him,
			threaten him with fearfullest destruction: only by
			victoriously penetrating into Things themselves can he
			find peace and a stronghold. But is not this same looking
			through the Shows, or Vestures, into the Things,
			even the first preliminary to a <i>Philosophy of Clothes</i>?
			Do we not, in all this, discern some beckonings towards
			the true higher purport of such a Philosophy; and what
			shape it must assume with such a man, in such an era?</p>

			<p>Perhaps in entering on Book Third, the courteous
			Reader is not utterly without guess whither he is bound:
			nor, let us hope, for all the fantastic Dream-Grottoes
			through which, as is our lot with Teufelsdröckh, he
			must wander, will there be wanting between whiles some
			twinkling of a steady Polar Star.</p>

		</div>
	</div>
	<div id="book_third" class="book">
		<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page156" name="page156"></a>156</span></p>
		<h2 class="book_title">BOOK THIRD</h2>
		<div id="book_3_chapter_1" class="chapter">
			<p class="chapter_head">CHAPTER I</p>

			<h3 class="chapter_title">INCIDENT IN MODERN HISTORY</h3>

			<p><span class="first_word">As</span> a wonder-loving and wonder-seeking man, Teufelsdröckh,
			from an early part of this Clothes-Volume,
			has more and more exhibited himself. Striking it was,
			amid all his perverse cloudiness, with what force of
			vision and of heart he pierced into the mystery of the
			World; recognising in the highest sensible phenomena,
			so far as Sense went, only fresh or faded Raiment; yet
			ever, under this, a celestial Essence thereby rendered
			visible: and while, on the one hand, he trod the old
			rags of Matter, with their tinsels, into the mire, he on
			the other everywhere exalted Spirit above all earthly
			principalities and powers, and worshipped it, though
			under the meanest shapes, with a true Platonic Mysticism.
			What the man ultimately purposed by thus
			casting his Greek-fire into the general Wardrobe of the
			Universe; what such, more or less complete, rending
			and burning of Garments throughout the whole compass
			of Civilized Life and Speculation, should lead to; the
			rather as he was no Adamite, in any sense, and could
			not, like Rousseau, recommend either bodily or intellectual
			Nudity, and a return to the savage state: all
			this our readers are now bent to discover; this is, in
			fact, properly the gist and purport of Professor Teufelsdröckh&#8217;s
			Philosophy of Clothes.</p>

			<p>Be it remembered, however, that such purport is here
			not so much evolved, as detected to lie ready for evolving.
			We are to guide our British Friends into the new
			Gold-country, and show them the mines; nowise to dig-out
			and exhaust its wealth, which indeed remains for
			all time inexhaustible. Once there, let each dig for his
			own behoof, and enrich himself.</p>

			<p>Neither, in so capricious inexpressible a Work as this
			of the Professor&#8217;s can our course now more than formerly
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page157" name="page157"></a>157</span>be straightforward, step by step, but at best leap by
			leap. Significant Indications stand-out here and there;
			which for the critical eye, that looks both widely and
			narrowly, shape themselves into some ground-scheme of
			a Whole: to select these with judgment, so that a
			leap from one to the other be possible, and (in our old
			figure) by chaining them together, a passable Bridge be
			effected: this, as heretofore, continues our only method.
			Among such light-spots, the following, floating in much
			wild matter about <em>Perfectibility</em>, has seemed worth
			clutching at:</p>

			<p>&#8216;Perhaps the most remarkable incident in Modern
			History,&#8217; says Teufelsdröckh, &#8216;is not the Diet of
			Worms, still less the Battle of Austerlitz, Waterloo,
			Peterloo, or any other Battle; but an incident passed
			carelessly over by most Historians, and treated with
			some degree of ridicule by others: namely, George
			Fox&#8217;s making to himself a suit of Leather. This man,
			the first of the Quakers, and by trade a Shoemaker, was
			one of those, to whom, under ruder or purer form, the
			Divine Idea of the Universe is pleased to manifest itself;
			and, across all the hulls of Ignorance and earthly Degradation,
			shine through, in unspeakable Awfulness,
			unspeakable Beauty, on their souls: who therefore are
			rightly accounted Prophets, God-possessed; or even
			Gods, as in some periods it has chanced. Sitting in his
			stall; working on tanned hides, amid pincers, paste-horns,
			rosin, swine-bristles, and a nameless flood of
			rubbish, this youth had, nevertheless, a Living Spirit
			belonging to him; also an antique Inspired Volume,
			through which, as through a window, it could look upwards,
			and discern its celestial Home. The task of a
			daily pair of shoes, coupled even with some prospect of
			victuals, and an honourable Mastership in Cordwainery,
			and perhaps the post of Thirdborough in his hundred,
			as the crown of long faithful sewing,&#8212;was nowise
			satisfaction enough to such a mind: but ever amid
			the boring and hammering came tones from that far
			country, came Splendours and Terrors; for this poor
			Cordwainer, as we said, was a Man; and the Temple of
			Immensity, wherein as Man he had been sent to
			minister, was full of holy mystery to him.</p>

			<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page158" name="page158"></a>158</span>&#8216;The Clergy of the neighbourhood, the ordained
			Watchers and Interpreters of that same holy mystery,
			listened with unaffected tedium to his consultations, and
			advised him, as the solution of such doubts, to &#8220;drink
			beer and dance with the girls.&#8221; Blind leaders of the
			blind! For what end were their tithes levied and eaten;
			for what were their shovel-hats scooped-out, and their
			surplices and cassock-aprons girt-on; and such a church-repairing,
			and chaffering, and organing, and other
			racketing, held over that spot of God&#8217;s Earth,&#8212;if Man
			were but a Patent Digester, and the Belly with its
			adjuncts the grand Reality? Fox turned from them,
			with tears and a sacred scorn, back to his Leather-parings
			and his Bible. Mountains of encumbrance, higher
			than Ætna, had been heaped over that Spirit: but it
			was a Spirit, and would not lie buried there. Through
			long days and nights of silent agony, it struggled and
			wrestled, with a man&#8217;s force, to be free: how its prison-mountains
			heaved and swayed tumultuously, as the giant
			spirit shook them to this hand and that, and emerged
			into the light of Heaven! That Leicester shoe-shop,
			had men known it, was a holier place than any Vatican
			or Loretto-shrine.&#8212;&#8220;So bandaged, and hampered, and
			hemmed in,&#8221; groaned he, &#8220;with thousand requisitions,
			obligations, straps, tatters, and tagrags, I can neither
			see nor move: not my own am I, but the World&#8217;s; and
			Time flies fast, and Heaven is high, and Hell is deep:
			Man! bethink thee, if thou hast power of Thought!
			Why not; what binds me here? Want, want!&#8212;Ha,
			of what? Will all the shoe-wages under the Moon ferry
			me across into that far Land of Light? Only Meditation
			can, and devout Prayer to God. I will to the
			woods: the hollow of a tree will lodge me, wild-berries
			feed me; and for Clothes, cannot I stitch myself one
			perennial suit of Leather!&#8221;</p>

			<p>&#8216;Historical Oil-painting,&#8217; continues Teufelsdröckh,
			&#8216;is one of the Arts I never practised; therefore shall
			I not decide whether this subject were easy of execution
			on the canvas. Yet often has it seemed to me as
			if such first outflashing of man&#8217;s Freewill, to lighten,
			more and more into Day, the Chaotic Night that
			threatened to engulf him in its hindrances and its
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page159" name="page159"></a>159</span>horrors, were properly the only grandeur there is in
			History. Let some living Angelo or Rosa, with seeing
			eye and understanding heart, picture George Fox on that
			morning, when he spreads-out his cutting-board for the
			last time, and cuts cowhides by unwonted patterns, and
			stitches them together into one continuous all-including
			Case, the farewell service of his awl! Stitch away, thou
			noble Fox: every prick of that little instrument is
			pricking into the heart of Slavery, and World-worship,
			and the Mammon-god. Thy elbows jerk, and in strong
			swimmer-strokes, and every stroke is bearing thee across
			the Prison-ditch, within which Vanity holds her Workhouse
			and Ragfair, into lands of true Liberty; were the
			work done, there is in broad Europe one Free Man, and
			thou art he!</p>

			<p>&#8216;Thus from the lowest depth there is a path to the
			loftiest height; and for the Poor also a Gospel has
			been published. Surely if, as D&#8217;Alembert asserts, my
			illustrious namesake, Diogenes, was the greatest man
			of Antiquity, only that he wanted Decency, then by
			stronger reason is George Fox the greatest of the
			Moderns; and greater than Diogenes himself: for he
			too stands on the adamantine basis of his Manhood,
			casting aside all props and shoars; yet not, in half-savage
			Pride, undervaluing the Earth; valuing it rather,
			as a place to yield him warmth and food, he looks
			Heavenward from his Earth, and dwells in an element
			of Mercy and Worship, with a still Strength, such as
			the Cynic&#8217;s Tub did nowise witness. Great, truly, was
			that Tub; a temple from which man&#8217;s dignity and
			divinity was scornfully preached abroad: but greater
			is the Leather Hull, for the same sermon was preached
			there, and not in Scorn but in Love.&#8217;</p>

			<p class="post_thoughtbreak">George Fox&#8217;s &#8216;perennial suit,&#8217; with all that it held,
			has been worn quite into ashes for nigh two centuries:
			why, in a discussion on the <i>Perfectibility of Society</i>,
			reproduce it now? Not out of blind sectarian partisanship:
			Teufelsdröckh himself is no Quaker; with all his
			pacific tendencies, did not we see him, in that scene
			at the North Cape, with the Archangel Smuggler,
			exhibit fire-arms?</p>

			<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page160" name="page160"></a>160</span>For us, aware of his deep Sansculottism, there is
			more meant in this passage than meets the ear. At
			the same time, who can avoid smiling at the earnestness
			and Bœotian simplicity (if indeed there be not an underhand
			satire in it), with which that &#8216;Incident&#8217; is here
			brought forward; and, in the Professor&#8217;s ambiguous
			way, as clearly perhaps as he durst in Weissnichtwo,
			recommended to imitation! Does Teufelsdröckh anticipate
			that, in this age of refinement, any considerable
			class of the community, by way of testifying against the
			&#8216;Mammon-god,&#8217; and escaping from what he calls
			&#8216;Vanity&#8217;s Workhouse and Ragfair,&#8217; where doubtless
			some of them are toiled and whipped and hoodwinked
			sufficiently,&#8212;will sheathe themselves in close-fitting
			cases of Leather? The idea is ridiculous in the extreme.
			Will Majesty lay aside its robes of state, and Beauty its
			frills and train-gowns, for a second-skin of tanned hide?
			By which change Huddersfield and Manchester, and
			Coventry and Paisley, and the Fancy-Bazaar, were
			reduced to hungry solitudes; and only Day and Martin
			could profit. For neither would Teufelsdröckh&#8217;s mad
			daydream, here as we presume covertly intended, of
			levelling Society (<em>levelling</em> it indeed with a vengeance,
			into one huge drowned marsh!), and so attaining the
			political effects of Nudity without its frigorific or other
			consequences,&#8212;be thereby realised. Would not the rich
			man purchase a waterproof suit of Russia Leather; and
			the high-born Belle step-forth in red or azure morocco,
			lined with shamoy: the black cowhide being left to the
			Drudges and Gibeonites of the world; and so all the old
			Distinctions be re-established?</p>

			<p>Or has the Professor his own deeper intention; and
			laughs in his sleeve at our strictures and glosses, which
			indeed are but a part thereof?</p>
		</div>
		<div id="book_3_chapter_2" class="chapter">
			<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page161" name="page161"></a>161</span></p>
			<p class="chapter_head">CHAPTER II</p>
			<h3 class="chapter_title">CHURCH-CLOTHES</h3>

			<p><span class="first_word">Not</span> less questionable is his Chapter on <i>Church-Clothes</i>,
			which has the farther distinction of being the
			shortest in the Volume. We here translate it entire:</p>

			<p>&#8216;By Church-Clothes, it need not be premised that I
			mean infinitely more than Cassocks and Surplices; and
			do not at all mean the mere haberdasher Sunday
			Clothes that men go to Church in. Far from it!
			Church-Clothes are, in our vocabulary, the Forms, the
			<em>Vestures</em>, under which men have at various periods
			embodied and represented for themselves the Religious
			Principle; that is to say, invested The Divine Idea of
			the World with a sensible and practically active Body,
			so that it might dwell among them as a living and life-giving
			<span class="special_emphasis">Word</span>.</p>

			<p>&#8216;These are unspeakably the most important of all
			the vestures and garnitures of Human Existence. They
			are first spun and woven, I may say, by that wonder of
			wonders, <span class="special_emphasis">Society</span>; for it is still only when &#8220;two or three
			are gathered together,&#8221; that Religion, spiritually existent,
			and indeed indestructible, however latent, in each,
			first outwardly manifests itself (as with &#8220;cloven tongues
			of fire&#8221;), and seeks to be embodied in a visible Communion
			and Church Militant. Mystical, more than
			magical, is that Communing of Soul with Soul, both
			looking heavenward: here properly Soul first speaks
			with Soul; for only in looking heavenward, take it in
			what sense you may, not in looking earthward, does
			what we can call Union, mutual Love, Society, begin
			to be possible. How true is that of Novalis: &#8220;It is
			certain my Belief gains quite <em>infinitely</em> the moment I
			can convince another mind thereof&#8221;! Gaze thou in the
			face of thy Brother, in those eyes where plays the lambent
			fire of Kindness, or in those where rages the lurid
			conflagration of Anger; feel how thy own so quiet Soul
			is straightway involuntarily kindled with the like, and ye
			blaze and reverberate on each other, till it is all one
			limitless confluent flame (of embracing Love, or of
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page162" name="page162"></a>162</span>deadly-grappling Hate); and then say what miraculous
			virtue goes out of man into man. But if so, through
			all the thick-plied hulls of our Earthly Life; how much
			more when it is of the Divine Life we speak, and inmost
			<span class="special_emphasis">Me</span> is, as it were, brought into contact with inmost <span class="special_emphasis">Me</span>!</p>

			<p>&#8216;Thus was it that I said, the Church-Clothes are
			first spun and woven by Society; outward Religion
			originates by Society, Society becomes possible by
			Religion. Nay, perhaps, every conceivable Society,
			past and present, may well be figured as properly and
			wholly a Church, in one or other of these three predicaments:
			an audibly preaching and prophesying Church,
			which is the best; second, a Church that struggles to
			preach and prophesy, but cannot as yet, till its Pentecost
			come; and third and worst, a Church gone dumb with
			old age, or which only mumbles delirium prior to dissolution.
			Whoso fancies that by Church is here meant
			Chapterhouses and Cathedrals, or by preaching and
			prophesying, mere speech and chanting, let him,&#8217; says
			the oracular Professor, &#8216;read on, light of heart (<i>getrosten
			Muthes</i>).</p>

			<p>&#8216;But with regard to your Church proper, and the
			Church-Clothes specially recognised as Church-Clothes,
			I remark, fearlessly enough, that without such Vestures
			and sacred Tissues Society has not existed, and will
			not exist. For if Government is, so to speak, the outward
			<span class="special_emphasis">Skin</span> of the Body Politic, holding the whole
			together and protecting it; and all your Craft-Guilds,
			and Associations for Industry, of hand or of head, are
			the Fleshly Clothes, the muscular and osseous Tissues
			(lying <em>under</em> such <span class="special_emphasis">Skin</span>), whereby Society stands and
			works;&#8212;then is Religion the inmost Pericardial and
			Nervous Tissue, which ministers Life and warm Circulation
			to the whole. Without which Pericardial Tissue
			the Bones and Muscles (of Industry) were inert, or
			animated only by a Galvanic vitality; the <span class="special_emphasis">Skin</span> would
			become a shrivelled pelt, or fast-rotting raw-hide; and
			Society itself a dead carcass,&#8212;deserving to be buried.
			Men were no longer Social, but Gregarious; which
			latter state also could not continue, but must gradually
			issue in universal selfish discord, hatred, savage isolation,
			and dispersion;&#8212;whereby, as we might continue to
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page163" name="page163"></a>163</span>say, the very dust and dead body of Society would have
			evaporated and become abolished. Such, and so all-important,
			all-sustaining, are the Church-Clothes to
			civilised or even to rational men.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Meanwhile, in our era of the World, those same
			Church-Clothes have gone sorrowfully out-at-elbows;
			nay, far worse, many of them have become mere hollow
			Shapes, or Masks, under which no living Figure or
			Spirit any longer dwells; but only spiders and unclean
			beetles, in horrid accumulation, drive their trade; and
			the mask still glares on you with its glass-eyes, in
			ghastly affectation of Life,&#8212;some generation-and-half
			after Religion has quite withdrawn from it, and in unnoticed
			nooks is weaving for herself new Vestures,
			wherewith to reappear, and bless us, or our sons or
			grandsons. As a Priest, or Interpreter of the Holy, is
			the noblest and highest of all men, so is a Sham-priest
			(<i>Schein-priester</i>) the falsest and basest; neither is it
			doubtful that his Canonicals, were they Popes&#8217; Tiaras,
			will one day be torn from him, to make bandages for
			the wounds of mankind; or even to burn into tinder, for
			general scientific or culinary purposes.</p>

			<p>&#8216;All which, as out of place here, falls to be handled
			in my Second Volume, <i>On the Palingenesia, or Newbirth
			of Society</i>; which volume, as treating practically
			of the Wear, Destruction, and Retexture of Spiritual
			Tissues, or Garments, forms, properly speaking, the
			Transcendental or ultimate Portion of this my work <i>on
			Clothes</i>, and is already in a state of forwardness.&#8217;</p>

			<p>And herewith, no farther exposition, note, or commentary
			being added, does Teufelsdröckh, and must his
			Editor now, terminate the singular chapter on Church-Clothes!</p>

		</div>
		<div id="book_3_chapter_3" class="chapter">
			<p class="chapter_head">CHAPTER III</p>

			<h3 class="chapter_title">SYMBOLS</h3>

			<p><span class="first_word">Probably</span> it will elucidate the drift of these foregoing
			obscure utterances, if we here insert somewhat of our
			Professor&#8217;s speculations on <i>Symbols</i>. To state his whole
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page164" name="page164"></a>164</span>doctrine, indeed, were beyond our compass: nowhere
			is he more mysterious, impalpable, than in this of &#8216;Fantasy
			being the organ of the God-like;&#8217; and how &#8216;Man
			thereby, though based, to all seeming, on the small
			Visible, does nevertheless extend down into the infinite
			deeps of the Invisible, of which Invisible, indeed, his
			Life is properly the bodying forth.&#8217; Let us, omitting
			these high transcendental aspects of the matter, study
			to glean (whether from the Paper-bags or the Printed
			Volume) what little seems logical and practical, and
			cunningly arrange it into such degree of coherence as it
			will assume. By way of proem, take the following not
			injudicious remarks:</p>

			<p>&#8216;The benignant efficacies of Concealment,&#8217; cries our
			Professor, &#8216;who shall speak or sing? <span class="special_emphasis">Silence</span> and
			<span class="special_emphasis">Secrecy</span>! Altars might still be raised to them (were this
			an altar-building time) for universal worship. Silence is
			the element in which great things fashion themselves
			together; that at length they may emerge, full-formed
			and majestic, into the daylight of Life, which they are
			thenceforth to rule. Not William the Silent only, but
			all the considerable men I have known, and the most
			undiplomatic and unstrategic of these, forbore to babble
			of what they were creating and projecting. Nay, in thy
			own mean perplexities, do thou thyself but <i>hold thy
			tongue for one day</i>: on the morrow, how much clearer
			are thy purposes and duties; what wreck and rubbish
			have those mute workmen within thee swept away,
			when intrusive noises were shut out! Speech is too
			often not, as the Frenchman defined it, the art of concealing
			Thought; but of quite stifling and suspending
			Thought, so that there is none to conceal. Speech too
			is great, but not the greatest. As the Swiss Inscription
			says: <i>Sprechen ist silbern, Schweigen ist golden</i>
			(Speech is silvern, Silence is golden); or as I might
			rather express it: Speech is of Time, Silence is of
			Eternity.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Bees will not work except in darkness; Thought
			will not work except in Silence; neither will Virtue work
			except in Secrecy. Let not thy left hand know what
			thy right hand doeth! Neither shalt thou prate even
			to thy own heart of &#8220;those secrets known to all.&#8221; Is
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page165" name="page165"></a>165</span>not Shame (<i>Schaam</i>) the soil of all Virtue, of all good
			manners and good morals? Like other plants, Virtue
			will not grow unless its root be hidden, buried from the
			eye of the sun. Let the sun shine on it, nay do but
			look at it privily thyself, the root withers, and no flower
			will glad thee. O my Friends, when we view the fair
			clustering flowers that over-wreathe, for example, the
			Marriage-bower, and encircle man&#8217;s life with the fragrance
			and hues of Heaven, what hand will not smite the
			foul plunderer that grubs them up by the roots, and
			with grinning, grunting satisfaction, shows us the dung
			they flourish in! Men speak much of the Printing-Press
			with its Newspapers: <i>du Himmel!</i> what are these
			to Clothes and the Tailor&#8217;s Goose?&#8217;</p>

			<p>&#8216;Of kin to the so incalculable influences of Concealment,
			and connected with still greater things, is the
			wondrous agency of <i>Symbols</i>. In a Symbol there is
			concealment and yet revelation: here therefore, by
			Silence and by Speech acting together, comes a double
			significance. And if both the Speech be itself high, and
			the Silence fit and noble, how expressive will their union
			be! Thus in many a painted Device, or simple Seal-emblem,
			the commonest Truth stands-out to us proclaimed
			with quite new emphasis.</p>

			<p>&#8216;For it is here that Fantasy with her mystic wonderland
			plays into the small prose domain of Sense, and
			becomes incorporated therewith. In the Symbol proper,
			what we can call a Symbol, there is ever, more or less
			distinctly and directly, some embodiment and revelation
			of the Infinite; the Infinite is made to blend itself with
			the Finite, to stand visible, and as it were, attainable
			there. By Symbols, accordingly, is man guided and
			commanded, made happy, made wretched. He everywhere
			finds himself encompassed with Symbols, recognised
			as such or not recognised: the Universe is but
			one vast Symbol of God; nay if thou wilt have it, what
			is man himself but a Symbol of God; is not all that he
			does symbolical; a revelation to Sense of the mystic
			god-given force that is in him; a &#8220;Gospel of Freedom,&#8221;
			which he, the &#8220;Messias of Nature,&#8221; preaches, as he can,
			by act and word? Not a Hut he builds but is the visible
			embodiment of a Thought; but bears visible record
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page166" name="page166"></a>166</span>of invisible things; but is, in the transcendental sense,
			symbolical as well as real.&#8217;</p>

			<p>&#8216;Man,&#8217; says the Professor elsewhere, in quite antipodal
			contrast with these high-soaring delineations,
			which we have here cut short on the verge of the inane,
			&#8216;Man is by birth somewhat of an owl. Perhaps, too,
			of all the owleries that ever possessed him, the most
			owlish, if we consider it, is that of your actually existing
			Motive-Millwrights. Fantastic tricks enough man has
			played, in his time; has fancied himself to be most
			things, down even to an animated heap of Glass; but
			to fancy himself a dead Iron-Balance for weighing Pains
			and Pleasures on, was reserved for this his latter era.
			There stands he, his Universe one huge Manger, filled
			with hay and thistles to be weighed against each other;
			and looks long-eared enough. Alas, poor devil! spectres
			are appointed to haunt him: one age he is hag-ridden,
			bewitched; the next, priestridden, befooled; in all ages,
			bedevilled. And now the Genius of Mechanism smothers
			him worse than any Nightmare did; till the Soul is
			nigh choked out of him, and only a kind of Digestive,
			Mechanic life remains. In Earth and in Heaven he can
			see nothing but Mechanism; has fear for nothing else,
			hope in nothing else: the world would indeed grind
			him to pieces; but cannot he fathom the Doctrine of
			Motives, and cunningly compute these, and mechanise
			them to grind the other way?</p>

			<p>&#8216;Were he not, as has been said, purblinded by enchantment,
			you had but to bid him open his eyes and
			look. In which country, in which time, was it hitherto
			that man&#8217;s history, or the history of any man, went on
			by calculated or calculable &#8220;Motives&#8221;? What make ye
			of your Christianities, and Chivalries, and Reformations,
			and Marseillese Hymns, and Reigns of Terror? Nay,
			has not perhaps the Motive-grinder himself been <i>in
			Love</i>? Did he never stand so much as a contested
			Election? Leave him to Time, and the medicating
			virtue of Nature.&#8217;</p>

			<p>&#8216;Yes, Friends,&#8217; elsewhere observes the Professor,
			&#8216;not our Logical, Mensurative faculty, but our Imaginative
			one is King over us; I might say, Priest and
			Prophet to lead us heavenward; our Magician and
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page167" name="page167"></a>167</span>Wizard to lead us hellward. Nay, even for the basest
			Sensualist, what is Sense but the implement of Fantasy;
			the vessel it drinks out of? Ever in the dullest existence
			there is a sheen either of Inspiration or of Madness
			(thou partly hast it in thy choice, which of the two), that
			gleams-in from the circumambient Eternity, and colours
			with its own hues our little islet of Time. The Understanding
			is indeed thy window, too clear thou canst not
			make it; but Fantasy is thy eye, with its colour-giving
			retina, healthy or diseased. Have not I myself known
			five-hundred living soldiers sabred into crows&#8217;-meat for
			a piece of glazed cotton, which they called their Flag;
			which, had you sold it at any market-cross, would not
			have brought above three groschen? Did not the whole
			Hungarian Nation rise, like some tumultuous moon-stirred
			Atlantic, when Kaiser Joseph pocketed their Iron
			Crown; an Implement, as was sagaciously observed, in
			size and commercial value little differing from a horse-shoe?
			It is in and through <i>Symbols</i> that man, consciously
			or unconsciously, lives, works, and has his
			being: those ages, moreover, are accounted the noblest
			which can the best recognise symbolical worth, and prize
			it the highest. For is not a Symbol ever, to him who
			has eyes for it, some dimmer or clearer revelation of
			the Godlike?</p>

			<p>&#8216;Of Symbols, however, I remark farther, that they
			have both an extrinsic and intrinsic value; oftenest
			the former only. What, for instance, was in that
			clouted Shoe, which the Peasants bore aloft with them
			as ensign in their <i>Bauernkrieg</i> (Peasants&#8217; War)? Or
			in the Wallet-and-staff round which the Netherland
			<i>Gueux</i>, glorying in that nickname of Beggars, heroically
			rallied and prevailed, though against King Philip
			himself? Intrinsic significance these had none: only
			extrinsic; as the accidental Standards of multitudes
			more or less sacredly uniting together; in which union
			itself, as above noted, there is ever something mystical
			and borrowing of the Godlike. Under a like category,
			too, stand, or stood, the stupidest heraldic Coats-of-arms;
			military Banners everywhere; and generally all
			national or other Sectarian Costumes and Customs: they
			have no intrinsic, necessary divineness, or even worth;
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page168" name="page168"></a>168</span>but have acquired an extrinsic one. Nevertheless
			through all these there glimmers something of a Divine
			Idea; as through military Banners themselves, the
			Divine Idea of Duty, of heroic Daring; in some instances
			of Freedom, of Right. Nay, the highest ensign
			that men ever met and embraced under, the Cross itself,
			had no meaning save an accidental extrinsic one.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Another matter it is, however, when your Symbol
			has intrinsic meaning, and is of itself <em>fit</em> that men should
			unite round it. Let but the Godlike manifest itself to
			Sense; let but Eternity look, more or less visibly,
			through the Time-Figure (<i>Zeitbild</i>)! Then is it fit that
			men unite there; and worship together before such
			Symbol; and so from day to day, and from age to age,
			superadd to it new divineness.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Of this latter sort are all true works of Art: in
			them (if thou know a Work of Art from a Daub of
			Artifice) wilt thou discern Eternity looking through
			Time; the Godlike rendered visible. Here too may an
			extrinsic value gradually superadd itself: thus certain
			<i>Iliads</i>, and the like, have, in three-thousand years, attained
			quite new significance. But nobler than all in
			this kind, are the Lives of heroic god-inspired Men; for
			what other Work of Art is so divine? In Death too, in
			the Death of the Just, as the last perfection of a Work
			of Art, may we not discern symbolic meaning? In that
			divinely transfigured Sleep, as of Victory, resting over
			the beloved face which now knows thee no more, read
			(if thou canst for tears) the confluence of Time with
			Eternity, and some gleam of the latter peering through.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Highest of all Symbols are those wherein the Artist
			or Poet has risen into Prophet, and all men can recognise
			a present God, and worship the same: I mean religious
			Symbols. Various enough have been such religious
			Symbols, what we call <i>Religions</i>; as men stood in this
			stage of culture or the other, and could worse or better
			body-forth the Godlike: some Symbols with a transient
			intrinsic worth; many with only an extrinsic. If thou
			ask to what height man has carried it in this manner,
			look on our divinest Symbol: on Jesus of Nazareth, and
			his Life, and his Biography, and what followed therefrom.
			Higher has the human Thought not yet reached:
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page169" name="page169"></a>169</span>this is Christianity and Christendom; a Symbol of quite
			perennial, infinite character: whose significance will ever
			demand to be anew inquired into, and anew made
			manifest.</p>

			<p>&#8216;But, on the whole, as time adds much to the sacredness
			of Symbols, so likewise in his progress he at
			length defaces or even desecrates them; and Symbols,
			like all terrestrial Garments, wax old. Homer&#8217;s Epos
			has not ceased to be true; yet it is no longer <em>our</em> Epos,
			but shines in the distance, if clearer and clearer, yet
			also smaller and smaller, like a receding Star. It needs
			a scientific telescope, it needs to be reinterpreted and
			artificially brought near us, before we can so much as
			know that it <em>was</em> a Sun. So likewise a day comes when
			the Runic Thor, with his Eddas, must withdraw into
			dimness; and many an African Mumbo-Jumbo and
			Indian Pawaw be utterly abolished. For all things,
			even Celestial Luminaries, much more atmospheric
			meteors, have their rise, their culmination, their decline.&#8217;</p>

			<p>&#8216;Small is this which thou tellest me, that the Royal
			Sceptre is but a piece of gilt-wood; that the Pyx has
			become a most foolish box, and truly, as Ancient Pistol
			thought, &#8220;of little price.&#8221; A right Conjuror might I
			name thee, couldst thou conjure back into these wooden
			tools the divine virtue they once held.&#8217;</p>

			<p>&#8216;Of this thing, however, be certain: wouldst thou
			plant for Eternity, then plant into the deep infinite
			faculties of man, his Fantasy and Heart; wouldst thou
			plant for Year and Day, then plant into his shallow
			superficial faculties, his Self-love and Arithmetical
			Understanding, what will grow there. A Hierarch,
			therefore, and Pontiff of the World will we call him, the
			Poet and inspired Maker; who, Prometheus-like, can
			shape new Symbols, and bring new Fire from Heaven
			to fix it there. Such too will not always be wanting;
			neither perhaps now are. Meanwhile, as the average
			of matters goes, we account him Legislator and wise
			who can so much as tell when a Symbol has grown old,
			and gently remove it.</p>

			<p>&#8216;When, as the last English Coronation<span class="footnote_marker">*</span><span class="footnote">* That of George IV.&#8212;<span class="special_emphasis">Ed.</span></span> was preparing,&#8217;
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page170" name="page170"></a>170</span>concludes this wonderful Professor, &#8216;I read
			in their Newspapers that the &#8220;Champion of England,&#8221;
			he who has to offer battle to the Universe for his new
			King, had brought it so far that he could now &#8220;mount
			his horse with little assistance,&#8221; I said to myself: Here
			also we have a Symbol well-nigh superannuated. Alas,
			move whithersoever you may, are not the tatters and
			rags of superannuated worn-out symbols (in this Ragfair
			of a World) dropping off everywhere, to hoodwink,
			to halter, to tether you; nay, if you shake them not
			aside, threatening to accumulate, and perhaps produce
			suffocation?&#8217;</p>

		</div>
		<div id="book_3_chapter_4" class="chapter">
			<p class="chapter_head">CHAPTER IV</p>

			<h3 class="chapter_title">HELOTAGE</h3>

			<p><span class="first_word">At</span> this point we determine on adverting shortly, or
			rather reverting, to a certain Tract of Hofrath Heuschrecke&#8217;s,
			entitled <i>Institute for the Repression of Population</i>;
			which lies, dishonourable enough (with torn
			leaves, and a perceptible smell of aloetic drugs), stuffed
			into the Bag <i>Pisces</i>. Not indeed for the sake of the
			Tract itself, which we admire little; but of the marginal
			Notes, evidently in Teufelsdröckh&#8217;s hand, which rather
			copiously fringe it. A few of these may be in their
			right place here.</p>

			<p>Into the Hofrath&#8217;s <i>Institute</i>, with its extraordinary
			schemes, and machinery of Corresponding Boards and
			the like, we shall not so much as glance. Enough for
			us to understand that Heuschrecke is a disciple of
			Malthus; and so zealous for the doctrine, that his zeal
			almost literally eats him up. A deadly fear of Population
			possesses the Hofrath; something like a fixed-idea;
			undoubtedly akin to the more diluted forms of Madness.
			Nowhere, in that quarter of his intellectual world, is
			there light; nothing but a grim shadow of Hunger;
			open mouths opening wider and wider; a world to
			terminate by the frightfullest consummation: by its too
			dense inhabitants, famished into delirium, universally
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page171" name="page171"></a>171</span>eating one another. To make air for himself in which
			strangulation, choking enough to a benevolent heart,
			the Hofrath founds, or proposes to found, this <i>Institute</i>
			of his, as the best he can do. It is only with our Professor&#8217;s
			comments thereon that we concern ourselves.</p>

			<p>First, then, remark that Teufelsdröckh, as a speculative
			Radical, has his own notions about human
			dignity; that the Zähdarm palaces and courtesies have
			not made him forgetful of the Futteral cottages. On
			the blank cover of Heuschrecke&#8217;s Tract we find the
			following indistinctly engrossed:</p>

			<p>&#8216;Two men I honour, and no third. First, the toil-worn
			Craftsman that with earth-made Implement laboriously
			conquers the Earth, and makes her man&#8217;s. Venerable
			to me is the hard Hand; crooked, coarse; wherein
			notwithstanding lies a cunning virtue, indefeasibly
			royal, as of the Sceptre of this Planet. Venerable too
			is the rugged face, all weather-tanned, besoiled, with
			its rude intelligence; for it is the face of a Man living
			manlike. O, but the more venerable for thy rudeness,
			and even because we must pity as well as love thee!
			Hardly-entreated Brother! For us was thy back so
			bent, for us were thy straight limbs and fingers so
			deformed: thou wert our Conscript, on whom the lot
			fell, and fighting our battles wert so marred. For in
			thee too lay a god-created Form, but it was not to be
			unfolded; encrusted must it stand with the thick
			adhesions and defacements of Labour: and thy body,
			like thy soul, was not to know freedom. Yet toil on,
			toil on: <em>thou</em> art in thy duty, be out of it who may; thou
			toilest for the altogether indispensable, for daily bread.</p>

			<p>&#8216;A second man I honour, and still more highly:
			Him who is seen toiling for the spiritually indispensable;
			not daily bread, but the bread of Life. Is not he
			too in his duty; endeavouring towards inward Harmony;
			revealing this, by act or by word, through all
			his outward endeavours, be they high or low? Highest
			of all, when his outward and his inward endeavour are
			one: when we can name him Artist; not earthly Craftsman
			only, but inspired Thinker, who with heaven-made
			Implement conquers Heaven for us! If the poor and
			humble toil that we have Food, must not the high and
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page172" name="page172"></a>172</span>glorious toil for him in return, that he have Light,
			have Guidance, Freedom, Immortality?&#8212;These two, in
			all their degrees, I honour: all else is chaff and dust,
			which let the wind blow whither it listeth.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Unspeakably touching is it, however, when I find
			both dignities united; and he that must toil outwardly
			for the lowest of man&#8217;s wants, is also toiling inwardly
			for the highest. Sublimer in this world know I
			nothing than a Peasant Saint, could such now anywhere
			be met with. Such a one will take thee back to
			Nazareth itself; thou wilt see the splendour of Heaven
			spring forth from the humblest depths of Earth, like a
			light shining in great darkness.&#8217;</p>

			<p>And again: &#8216;It is not because of his toils that I
			lament for the poor: we must all toil, or steal (howsoever
			we name our stealing), which is worse; no faithful
			workman finds his task a pastime. The poor is
			hungry and a-thirst; but for him also there is food and
			drink: he is heavy-laden and weary; but for him also
			the Heavens send Sleep, and of the deepest; in his
			smoky cribs, a clear dewy heaven of Rest envelops him,
			and fitful glitterings of cloud-skirted Dreams. But
			what I do mourn over is, that the lamp of his soul
			should go out; that no ray of heavenly, or even of
			earthly knowledge, should visit him; but only, in the
			haggard darkness, like two spectres, Fear and Indignation
			bear him company. Alas, while the Body stands
			so broad and brawny, must the soul lie blinded, dwarfed,
			stupefied, almost annihilated! Alas, was this too a
			Breath of God; bestowed in Heaven, but on earth never
			to be unfolded!&#8212;That there should one Man die
			ignorant who had capacity for Knowledge, this I call
			a tragedy, were it to happen more than twenty times in
			the minute, as by some computations it does. The miserable
			fraction of Science which our united Mankind, in
			a wide Universe of Nescience, has acquired, why is not
			this, with all diligence, imparted to all?&#8217;</p>

			<p>Quite in an opposite strain is the following: &#8216;The
			old Spartans had a wiser method; and went out and
			hunted-down their Helots, and speared and spitted
			them, when they grew too numerous. With our
			improved fashions of hunting, Herr Hofrath, now after
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page173" name="page173"></a>173</span>the invention of fire-arms, and standing-armies, how
			much easier were such a hunt! Perhaps in the most
			thickly-peopled country, some three days annually might
			suffice to shoot all the able-bodied Paupers that had
			accumulated within the year. Let Governments think
			of this. The expense were trifling: nay the very carcasses
			would pay it. Have them salted and barrelled;
			could not you victual therewith, if not Army and Navy,
			yet richly such infirm Paupers, in workhouses and elsewhere,
			as enlightened Charity, dreading no evil of them,
			might see good to keep alive?&#8217;</p>

			<p>&#8216;And yet,&#8217; writes he farther on, &#8216;there must be
			something wrong. A full-formed Horse will, in any
			market, bring from twenty to as high as two-hundred
			Friedrichs d&#8217;or: such is his worth to the world. A full-formed
			Man is not only worth nothing to the world, but
			the world could afford him a round sum would he simply
			engage to go and hang himself. Nevertheless, which
			of the two was the more cunningly-devised article, even
			as an Engine? Good Heavens! A white European
			Man, standing on his two Legs, with his two five-fingered
			Hands at his shackle-bones, and miraculous
			Head on his shoulders, is worth, I should say, from
			fifty to a hundred Horses!&#8217;</p>

			<p>&#8216;True, thou Gold-Hofrath,&#8217; cries the Professor
			elsewhere: &#8216;too crowded indeed! Meanwhile, what
			portion of this inconsiderable terraqueous Globe have
			ye actually tilled and delved, till it will grow no more?
			How thick stands your Population in the Pampas and
			Savannas of America; round ancient Carthage, and in
			the interior of Africa; on both slopes of the Altaic chain,
			in the central Platform of Asia; in Spain, Greece,
			Turkey, Crim Tartary, the Curragh of Kildare? One
			man, in one year, as I have understood it, if you lend
			him Earth, will feed himself and nine others. Alas,
			where now are the Hengsts and Alarics of our still-glowing,
			still-expanding Europe; who, when their home
			is grown too narrow, will enlist, and, like Fire-pillars,
			guide onwards those superfluous masses of indomitable
			living Valour; equipped, not now with the battle-axe
			and war-chariot, but with the steam-engine and ploughshare?
			Where are they?&#8212;Preserving their Game!&#8217;</p>

		</div>
		<div id="book_3_chapter_5" class="chapter">
			<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page174" name="page174"></a>174</span></p>
			<p class="chapter_head">CHAPTER V</p>
			<h3 class="chapter_title">THE PHŒNIX</h3>

			<p><span class="first_word">Putting</span> which four singular Chapters together, and
			alongside of them numerous hints, and even direct utterances,
			scattered over these Writings of his, we come
			upon the startling yet not quite unlooked-for conclusion,
			that Teufelsdröckh is one of those who consider Society,
			properly so called, to be as good as extinct; and that
			only the gregarious feelings, and old inherited habitudes,
			at this juncture, hold us from Dispersion, and
			universal national, civil, domestic and personal war!
			He says expressly: &#8216;For the last three centuries, above
			all for the last three quarters of a century, that same
			Pericardial Nervous Tissue (as we named it) of Religion,
			where lies the Life-essence of Society, has been smote-at
			and perforated, needfully and needlessly; till now it
			is quite rent into shreds; and Society, long pining,
			diabetic, consumptive, can be regarded as defunct; for
			those spasmodic, galvanic sprawlings are not life;
			neither indeed will they endure, galvanise as you may,
			beyond two days.&#8217;</p>

			<p>&#8216;Call ye that a Society,&#8217; cries he again, &#8216;where
			there is no longer any Social Idea extant; not so much
			as the Idea of a common Home, but only of a common
			over-crowded Lodging-house? Where each, isolated,
			regardless of his neighbour, turned against his neighbour,
			clutches what he can get, and cries &#8220;Mine!&#8221; and
			calls it Peace, because, in the cut-purse and cut-throat
			Scramble, no steel knives, but only a far cunninger sort,
			can be employed? Where Friendship, Communion,
			has become an incredible tradition; and your holiest
			Sacramental Supper is a smoking Tavern Dinner, with
			Cook for Evangelist? Where your Priest has no tongue
			but for plate-licking: and your high Guides and
			Governors cannot guide; but on all hands hear it passionately
			proclaimed: <i>Laissez faire</i>; Leave us alone of
			<em>your</em> guidance, such light is darker than darkness; eat
			you your wages, and sleep!</p>

			<p>&#8216;Thus, too,&#8217; continues he, &#8216;does an observant eye
			discern everywhere that saddest spectacle: The Poor
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page175" name="page175"></a>175</span>perishing, like neglected, foundered Draught-Cattle, of
			Hunger and Over-work; the Rich, still more wretchedly,
			of Idleness, Satiety, and Over-growth. The Highest in
			rank, at length, without honour from the Lowest;
			scarcely, with a little mouth-honour, as from tavern-waiters
			who expect to put it in the bill. Once-sacred
			Symbols fluttering as empty Pageants, whereof men
			grudge even the expense; a World becoming dismantled:
			in one word, the <span class="special_emphasis">Church</span> fallen speechless,
			from obesity and apoplexy; the <span class="special_emphasis">State</span> shrunken into a
			Police-Office, straitened to get its pay!&#8217;</p>

			<p>We might ask, are there many &#8216;observant eyes,&#8217;
			belonging to practical men in England or elsewhere,
			which have descried these phenomena; or is it only from
			the mystic elevation of a German <i>Wahngasse</i> that such
			wonders are visible? Teufelsdröckh contends that the
			aspect of a &#8216;deceased or expiring Society&#8217; fronts us
			everywhere, so that whoso runs may read. &#8216;What,
			for example,&#8217; says he, &#8216;is the universally-arrogated
			Virtue, almost the sole remaining Catholic Virtue, of
			these days? For some half century, it has been the
			thing you name &#8220;Independence.&#8221; Suspicion of &#8220;Servility,&#8221;
			of reverence for Superiors, the very dogleech
			is anxious to disavow. Fools! Were your Superiors
			worthy to govern, and you worthy to obey, reverence
			for them were even your only possible freedom. Independence,
			in all kinds, is rebellion; if unjust rebellion,
			why parade it, and everywhere prescribe it?&#8217;</p>

			<p>But what then? Are we returning, as Rousseau
			prayed, to the state of Nature? &#8216;The Soul Politic
			having departed,&#8217; says Teufelsdröckh, &#8216;what can follow
			but that the Body Politic be decently interred, to avoid
			putrescence! Liberals, Economists, Utilitarians enough
			I see marching with its bier, and chanting loud pæans,
			towards the funeral-pile, where, amid wailings from
			some, and saturnalian revelries from the most, the
			venerable Corpse is to be burnt. Or, in plain words,
			that these men, Liberals, Utilitarians, or whatsoever
			they are called, will ultimately carry their point, and
			dissever and destroy most existing Institutions of
			Society, seems a thing which has some time ago ceased
			to be doubtful.</p>

			<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page176" name="page176"></a>176</span>&#8216;Do we not see a little subdivision of the grand
			Utilitarian Armament come to light even in insulated
			England? A living nucleus, that will attract and grow,
			does at length appear there also; and under curious
			phasis; properly as the inconsiderable fag-end, and so
			far in the rear of the others as to fancy itself the van.
			Our European Mechanisers are a sect of boundless
			diffusion, activity, and co-operative spirit: has not
			Utilitarianism flourished in high places of Thought,
			here among ourselves, and in every European country,
			at some time or other, within the last fifty years? If
			now in all countries, except perhaps England, it has
			ceased to flourish, or indeed to exist, among Thinkers,
			and sunk to Journalists and the popular mass,&#8212;who
			sees not that, as hereby it no longer preaches, so the
			reason is, it now needs no Preaching, but is in full
			universal Action, the doctrine everywhere known, and
			enthusiastically laid to heart? The fit pabulum, in
			these times, for a certain rugged workshop intellect and
			heart, nowise without their corresponding workshop
			strength and ferocity, it requires but to be stated in such
			scenes to make proselytes enough.&#8212;Admirably calculated
			for destroying, only not for rebuilding! It
			spreads like a sort of Dog-madness; till the whole
			World-kennel will be rabid: then woe to the Huntsmen,
			with or without their whips! They should have given
			the quadrupeds water,&#8217; adds he; &#8216;the water, namely,
			of Knowledge and of Life, while it was yet time.&#8217;</p>

			<p>Thus, if Professor Teufelsdröckh can be relied on,
			we are at this hour in a most critical condition;
			beleaguered by that boundless &#8216;Armament of Mechanisers&#8217;
			and Unbelievers, threatening to strip us bare!
			&#8216;The world,&#8217; says he, &#8216;as it needs must, is under a
			process of devastation and waste, which, whether by
			silent assiduous corrosion, or open quicker combustion,
			as the case chances, will effectually enough annihilate
			the past Forms of Society; replace them with what it
			may. For the present, it is contemplated that when
			man&#8217;s whole Spiritual Interests are once <em>divested</em>, these
			innumerable stript-off Garments shall mostly be burnt;
			but the sounder Rags among them be quilted together
			into one huge Irish watchcoat for the defence of the
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page177" name="page177"></a>177</span>Body only!&#8217;&#8212;This, we think, is but Job&#8217;s-news to the
			humane reader.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Nevertheless,&#8217; cries Teufelsdröckh, &#8216;who can
			hinder it; who is there that can clutch into the wheel-spokes
			of Destiny, and say to the Spirit of the Time:
			Turn back, I command thee?&#8212;Wiser were it that we
			yielded to the Inevitable and Inexorable, and accounted
			even this the best.&#8217;</p>

			<p>Nay, might not an attentive Editor, drawing his own
			inferences from what stands written, conjecture that
			Teufelsdröckh individually had yielded to this same
			&#8216;Inevitable and Inexorable&#8217; heartily enough; and now
			sat waiting the issue, with his natural diabolico-angelical
			Indifference, if not even Placidity? Did we not
			hear him complain that the World was a &#8216;huge Ragfair,&#8217;
			and the &#8216;rags and tatters of old Symbols&#8217; were
			raining-down everywhere, like to drift him in, and
			suffocate him? What with those &#8216;unhunted Helots&#8217;
			of his; and the uneven <i>sic-vos-non-vobis</i> pressure and
			hard-crashing collision he is pleased to discern in existing
			things; what with the so hateful &#8217;empty Masks,&#8217;
			full of beetles and spiders, yet glaring out on him, from
			their glass eyes, &#8216;with a ghastly affectation of life,&#8217;&#8212;we
			feel entitled to conclude him even willing that
			much should be thrown to the Devil, so it were but done
			gently! Safe himself in that &#8216;Pinnacle of Weissnichtwo,&#8217;
			he would consent, with a tragic solemnity, that
			the monster <span class="special_emphasis">Utilitaria</span>, held back, indeed, and moderated
			by nose-rings, halters, foot-shackles, and every
			conceivable modification of rope, should go forth to
			do her work;&#8212;to tread down old ruinous Palaces and
			Temples with her broad hoof, till the whole were trodden
			down, that new and better might be built! Remarkable
			in this point of view are the following sentences.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Society,&#8217; says he, &#8216;is not dead: that Carcass,
			which you call dead Society, is but her mortal coil which
			she has shuffled off, to assume a nobler; she herself,
			through perpetual metamorphoses, in fairer and fairer
			development, has to live till Time also merge in Eternity.
			Wheresoever two or three Living Men are
			gathered together, there is Society; or there it will be,
			with its cunning mechanisms and stupendous structures,
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page178" name="page178"></a>178</span>overspreading this little Globe, and reaching upwards
			to Heaven and downwards to Gehenna: for always,
			under one or the other figure, it has two authentic
			Revelations, of a God and of a Devil; the Pulpit,
			namely, and the Gallows.&#8217;</p>

			<p>Indeed, we already heard him speak of &#8216;Religion,
			in unnoticed nooks, weaving for herself new Vestures&#8217;;&#8212;Teufelsdröckh
			himself being one of the loom-treadles?
			Elsewhere he quotes without censure that strange
			aphorism of Saint-Simon&#8217;s, concerning which and
			whom so much were to be said: <i>L&#8217;âge d&#8217;or, qu&#8217;une
			aveugle tradition a placé jusqu&#8217;ici dans le passé, est
			devant nous</i>; The golden age, which a blind tradition
			has hitherto placed in the Past, is Before us.&#8217;&#8212;But
			listen again:</p>

			<p>&#8216;When the Phœnix is fanning her funeral pyre, will
			there not be sparks flying! Alas, some millions of
			men, and among them such as a Napoleon, have already
			been licked into that high-eddying Flame, and like
			moths consumed there. Still also have we to fear that
			incautious beards will get singed.</p>

			<p>&#8216;For the rest, in what year of grace such Phœnix-cremation
			will be completed, you need not ask. The
			law of Perseverance is among the deepest in man: by
			nature he hates change; seldom will he quit his old
			house till it has actually fallen about his ears. Thus
			have I seen Solemnities linger as Ceremonies, sacred
			Symbols as idle-Pageants, to the extent of three-hundred
			years and more after all life and sacredness had evaporated
			out of them. And then, finally, what time the
			Phœnix Death-Birth itself will require, depends on
			unseen contingencies.&#8212;Meanwhile, would Destiny offer
			Mankind, that after, say two centuries of convulsion
			and conflagration, more or less vivid, the fire-creation
			should be accomplished, and we too find ourselves again
			in a Living Society, and no longer fighting but working,&#8212;were
			it not perhaps prudent in Mankind to strike
			the bargain?&#8217;</p>

			<p>Thus is Teufelsdröckh content that old sick Society
			should be deliberately burnt (alas! with quite other
			fuel than spicewood); in the faith that she is a Phœnix;
			and that a new heaven-born young one will rise out of
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page179" name="page179"></a>179</span>her ashes! We ourselves, restricted to the duty of
			Indicator, shall forbear commentary. Meanwhile, will
			not the judicious reader shake his head, and reproachfully,
			yet more in sorrow than in anger, say or think:
			From a <i>Doctor utriusque Juris</i>, titular Professor in a
			University, and man to whom hitherto, for his services,
			Society, bad as she is, has given not only food and
			raiment (of a kind), but books, tobacco and gukguk,
			we expected more gratitude to his benefactress; and less
			of a blind trust in the future, which resembles that
			rather of a philosophical Fatalist and Enthusiast, than
			of a solid householder paying scot-and-lot in a Christian
			country.</p>

		</div>
		<div id="book_3_chapter_6" class="chapter">
			<p class="chapter_head">CHAPTER VI</p>

			<h3 class="chapter_title">OLD CLOTHES</h3>

			<p><span class="first_word">As</span> mentioned above, Teufelsdröckh, though a sansculottist,
			is in practice probably the politest man extant:
			his whole heart and life are penetrated and informed
			with the spirit of politeness; a noble natural Courtesy
			shines through him, beautifying his vagaries; like sunlight,
			making a rosy-fingered, rainbow-dyed Aurora
			out of mere aqueous clouds; nay brightening London-smoke
			itself into gold vapour, as from the crucible of
			an alchemist. Hear in what earnest though fantastic
			wise he expresses himself on this head:</p>

			<p>&#8216;Shall Courtesy be done only to the rich, and only
			by the rich? In Good-breeding, which differs, if at all,
			from High-breeding, only as it gracefully remembers
			the rights of others, rather than gracefully insists on its
			own rights, I discern no special connexion with wealth
			or birth: but rather that it lies in human nature itself,
			and is due from all men towards all men. Of a truth,
			were your Schoolmaster at his post, and worth anything
			when there, this, with so much else, would be reformed.
			Nay, each man were then also his neighbour&#8217;s schoolmaster;
			till at length a rude-visaged, unmannered
			Peasant could no more be met with, than a Peasant
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page180" name="page180"></a>180</span>unacquainted with botanical Physiology, or who felt
			not that the clod he broke was created in Heaven.</p>

			<p>&#8216;For whether thou bear a sceptre or a sledgehammer,
			art thou not <span class="special_emphasis_smaller">ALIVE</span>; is not this thy brother
			<span class="special_emphasis_smaller">ALIVE</span>? &#8220;There is but one temple in the world,&#8221; says
			Novalis, &#8220;and that temple is the Body of Man. Nothing
			is holier than this high Form. Bending before
			men is a reverence done to this Revelation in the Flesh.
			We touch Heaven, when we lay our hands on a human
			Body.&#8221;</p>

			<p>&#8216;On which ground, I would fain carry it farther than
			most do; and whereas the English Johnson only bowed
			to every Clergyman, or man with a shovel-hat, I would
			bow to every Man with any sort of hat, or with no hat
			whatever. Is not he a Temple, then; the visible Manifestation
			and Impersonation of the Divinity? And yet,
			alas, such indiscriminate bowing serves not. For there
			is a Devil dwells in man, as well as a Divinity; and too
			often the bow is but pocketed by the <em>former</em>. It would
			go to the pocket of Vanity (which is your clearest phasis
			of the Devil, in these times); therefore must we withhold
			it.</p>

			<p>&#8216;The gladder am I, on the other hand, to do reverence
			to those Shells and outer Husks of the Body,
			wherein no devilish passion any longer lodges, but only
			the pure emblem and effigies of Man: I mean, to Empty,
			or even to Cast Clothes. Nay, is it not to Clothes that
			most men do reverence: to the fine frogged broadcloth,
			nowise to the &#8220;straddling animal with bandy legs&#8221;
			which it holds, and makes a Dignitary of? Who ever
			saw any Lord my-lorded in tattered blanket fastened with
			wooden skewer? Nevertheless, I say, there is in such
			worship a shade of hypocrisy, a practical deception: for
			how often does the Body appropriate what was meant
			for the Cloth only! Whoso would avoid falsehood,
			which is the essence of all Sin, will perhaps see good
			to take a different course. That reverence which cannot
			act without obstruction and perversion when the
			Clothes are full, may have free course when they are
			empty. Even as, for Hindoo Worshippers, the Pagoda
			is not less sacred than the God; so do I too worship the
			hollow cloth Garment with equal fervour, as when it
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page181" name="page181"></a>181</span>contained the Man: nay, with more, for I now fear no
			deception, of myself or of others.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Did not King <i>Toomtabard</i>, or, in other words, John
			Baliol, reign long over Scotland; the man John Baliol
			being quite gone, and only the &#8220;Toom Tabard&#8221; (Empty
			Gown) remaining? What still dignity dwells in a suit
			of Cast Clothes! How meekly it bears its honours! No
			haughty looks, no scornful gesture: silent and serene, it
			fronts the world; neither demanding worship, nor afraid
			to miss it. The Hat still carries the physiognomy of its
			Head: but the vanity and the stupidity, and goose-speech
			which was the sign of these two, are gone. The
			Coat-arm is stretched out, but not to strike; the
			Breeches, in modest simplicity, depend at ease, and now
			at last have a graceful flow; the Waistcoat hides no evil
			passion, no riotous desire; hunger or thirst now dwells
			not in it. Thus all is purged from the grossness of sense,
			from the carking cares and foul vices of the World; and
			rides there, on its Clothes-horse; as, on a Pegasus,
			might some skyey Messenger, or purified Apparition,
			visiting our low Earth.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Often, while I sojourned in that monstrous tuberosity
			of Civilised Life, the Capital of England; and
			meditated, and questioned Destiny, under that ink-sea
			of vapour, black, thick, and multifarious as Spartan
			broth; and was one lone soul amid those grinding
			millions;&#8212;often have I turned into their Old-Clothes
			Market to worship. With awe-struck heart I walk
			through that Monmouth Street, with its empty Suits, as
			through a Sanhedrim of stainless Ghosts. Silent are
			they, but expressive in their silence: the past witnesses
			and instruments of Woe and Joy, of Passions, Virtues,
			Crimes, and all the fathomless tumult of Good and Evil
			in &#8220;the Prison men call Life.&#8221; Friends! trust not the
			heart of that man for whom Old Clothes are not venerable.
			Watch, too, with reverence, that bearded Jewish
			High-priest, who with hoarse voice, like some Angel of
			Doom, summons them from the four winds! On his
			head, like the Pope, he has three Hats,&#8212;a real triple
			tiara; on either hand are the similitude of wings,
			whereon the summoned Garments come to alight; and
			ever, as he slowly cleaves the air, sounds forth his deep
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page182" name="page182"></a>182</span>fateful note, as if through a trumpet he were proclaiming:
			&#8220;Ghosts of Life, come to Judgment!&#8221; Reck not,
			ye fluttering Ghosts: he will purify you in his Purgatory,
			with fire and with water; and, one day, new-created
			ye shall reappear. O, let him in whom the flame
			of Devotion is ready to go out, who has never worshipped,
			and knows not what to worship, pace and
			repace, with austerest thought, the pavement of Monmouth
			Street, and say whether his heart and his eyes
			still continue dry. If Field Lane, with its long fluttering
			rows of yellow handkerchiefs, be a Dionysius&#8217; Ear,
			where, in stifled jarring hubbub, we hear the Indictment
			which Poverty and Vice bring against lazy Wealth,
			that it has left them there cast-out and trodden under
			foot of Want, Darkness and the Devil,&#8212;then is Monmouth
			Street a Mirza&#8217;s Hill, where, in motley vision,
			the whole Pageant of Existence passes awfully before
			us; with its wail and jubilee, mad loves and mad
			hatreds, church-bells and gallows-ropes, farce-tragedy,
			beast-godhood,&#8212;the Bedlam of Creation!&#8217;</p>

			<p class="post_thoughtbreak">To most men, as it does to ourselves, all this will
			seem overcharged. We too have walked through Monmouth
			Street; but with little feeling of &#8216;Devotion&#8217;:
			probably in part because the contemplative process is
			so fatally broken in upon by the brood of money-changers
			who nestle in that Church, and importune the
			worshipper with merely secular proposals. Whereas
			Teufelsdröckh might be in that happy middle state,
			which leaves to the Clothes-broker no hope either of
			sale or of purchase, and so be allowed to linger there
			without molestation.&#8212;Something we would have given
			to see the little philosophical figure, with its steeple-hat
			and loose flowing skirts, and eyes in a fine frenzy,
			&#8216;pacing and repacing in austerest thought&#8217; that
			foolish Street; which to him was a true Delphic avenue,
			and supernatural Whispering-gallery, where the
			&#8216;Ghosts of Life&#8217; rounded strange secrets in his ear.
			O thou philosophic Teufelsdröckh, that listenest while
			others only gabble, and with thy quick tympanum
			hearest the grass grow!</p>

			<p>At the same time, is it not strange that, in Paper-bag
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page183" name="page183"></a>183</span>Documents destined for an English work, there
			exists nothing like an authentic diary of this his sojourn
			in London; and of his Meditations among the Clothes-shops
			only the obscurest emblematic shadows? Neither,
			in conversation (for, indeed, he was not a man to pester
			you with his Travels), have we heard him more than
			allude to the subject.</p>

			<p>For the rest, however, it cannot be uninteresting that
			we here find how early the significance of Clothes had
			dawned on the now so distinguished Clothes-Professor.
			Might we but fancy it to have been even in Monmouth
			Street, at the bottom of our own English &#8216;ink-sea,&#8217;
			that this remarkable Volume first took being, and shot
			forth its salient point in his soul,&#8212;as in Chaos did the
			Egg of Eros, one day to be hatched into a Universe!</p>

		</div>
		<div id="book_3_chapter_7" class="chapter">
			<p class="chapter_head">CHAPTER VII</p>

			<h3 class="chapter_title">ORGANIC FILAMENTS</h3>

			<p><span class="first_word">For</span> us, who happen to live while the World-Phœnix
			is burning herself, and burning so slowly that, as
			Teufelsdröckh calculates, it were a handsome bargain
			would she engage to have done &#8216;within two centuries,&#8217;
			there seems to lie but an ashy prospect. Not altogether
			so, however, does the Professor figure it. &#8216;In the
			living subject,&#8217; says he, &#8216;change is wont to be
			gradual: thus, while the serpent sheds its old skin, the
			new is already formed beneath. Little knowest thou of
			the burning of a World-Phœnix, who fanciest that she
			must first burn-out, and lie as a dead cinereous heap;
			and therefrom the young one start-up by miracle, and
			fly heavenward. Far otherwise! In that Fire-whirlwind,
			Creation and Destruction proceed together; ever
			as the ashes of the Old are blown about, do organic
			filaments of the New mysteriously spin themselves: and
			amid the rushing and the waving of the Whirlwind-Element
			come tones of a melodious Deathsong, which
			end not but in tones of a more melodious Birthsong.
			Nay, look into the Fire-whirlwind with thy own eyes,
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page184" name="page184"></a>184</span>and thou wilt see.&#8217; Let us actually look, then: to poor
			individuals, who cannot expect to live two centuries,
			those same organic filaments, mysteriously spinning
			themselves, will be the best part of the spectacle. First,
			therefore, this of Mankind in general:</p>

			<p>&#8216;In vain thou deniest it,&#8217; says the Professor; &#8216;thou
			<em>art</em> my Brother. Thy very Hatred, thy very Envy,
			those foolish lies thou tellest of me in thy splenetic
			humour: what is all this but an inverted Sympathy?
			Were I a Steam-engine, wouldst thou take the trouble
			to tell lies of me? Not thou! I should grind all
			unheeded, whether badly or well.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Wondrous truly are the bonds that unite us one
			and all; whether by the soft binding of Love, or the iron
			chaining of Necessity, as we like to choose it. More
			than once have I said to myself, of some perhaps whimsically
			strutting Figure, such as provokes whimsical
			thoughts: &#8220;Wert thou, my little Brotherkin, suddenly
			covered-up within the largest imaginable Glass-bell,&#8212;what
			a thing it were, not for thyself only, but for the
			world! Post Letters, more or fewer, from all the four
			winds, impinge against thy Glass walls, but have to
			drop unread: neither from within comes there question
			or response into any Postbag; thy Thoughts fall into
			no friendly ear or heart, thy Manufacture into no
			purchasing hand: thou art no longer a circulating
			venous-arterial Heart, that, taking and giving, circulatest
			through all Space and all Time: there has a Hole
			fallen-out in the immeasurable, universal World-tissue,
			which must be darned-up again!&#8221;</p>

			<p>&#8216;Such venous-arterial circulation, of Letters, verbal
			Messages, paper and other Packages, going out from
			him and coming in, are a blood-circulation, visible to
			the eye: but the finer nervous circulation, by which all
			things, the minutest that he does, minutely influence
			all men, and the very look of his face blesses or curses
			whomso it lights on, and so generates ever new blessing
			or new cursing: all this you cannot see, but only
			imagine. I say, there is not a red Indian, hunting by
			Lake Winnipic, can quarrel with his squaw, but the
			whole world must smart for it: will not the price of
			beaver rise? It is a mathematical fact that the casting
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page185" name="page185"></a>185</span>of this pebble from my hand alters the centre of gravity
			of the Universe.</p>

			<p>&#8216;If now an existing generation of men stand so
			woven together, not less indissolubly does generation
			with generation. Hast thou ever meditated on that
			word, Tradition: how we inherit not Life only, but all
			the garniture and form of Life; and work, and speak,
			and even think and feel, as our Fathers, and primeval
			grandfathers, from the beginning, have given it us?&#8212;Who
			printed thee, for example, this unpretending
			Volume on the Philosophy of Clothes? Not the Herren
			Stillschweigen and Company; but Cadmus of Thebes,
			Faust of Mentz, and innumerable others whom thou
			knowest not. Had there been no Mœsogothic Ulfila,
			there had been no English Shakspeare, or a different
			one. Simpleton! it was Tubalcain that made thy very
			Tailor&#8217;s needle, and sewed that court-suit of thine.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Yes, truly; if Nature is one, and a living indivisible
			whole, much more is Mankind, the Image that reflects
			and creates Nature, without which Nature were not. As
			palpable life-streams in that wondrous Individual Mankind,
			among so many life-streams that are not palpable,
			flow on those main-currents of what we call Opinion;
			as preserved in Institutions, Polities, Churches, above
			all in Books. Beautiful it is to understand and know
			that a Thought did never yet die; that as thou, the
			originator thereof, hast gathered it and created it from
			the whole Past, so thou wilt transmit it to the whole
			Future. It is thus that the heroic heart, the seeing eye
			of the first times, still feels and sees in us of the latest;
			that the Wise Man stands ever encompassed, and
			spiritually embraced, by a cloud of witnesses and
			brothers; and there is a living, literal <i>Communion of
			Saints</i>, wide as the World itself, and as the History of
			the World.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Noteworthy also, and serviceable for the progress
			of this same Individual, wilt thou find his subdivision
			into Generations. Generations are as the Days of toilsome
			Mankind: Death and Birth are the vesper and the
			matin bells, that summon Mankind to sleep, and to rise
			refreshed for new advancement. What the Father has
			made, the Son can make and enjoy; but has also work
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page186" name="page186"></a>186</span>of his own appointed him. Thus all things wax, and
			roll onwards; Arts, Establishments, Opinions, nothing
			is completed, but ever completing. Newton has learned
			to see what Kepler saw; but there is also a fresh heaven-derived
			force in Newton; he must mount to still higher
			points of vision. So too the Hebrew Lawgiver is, in
			due time, followed by an Apostle of the Gentiles. In the
			business of Destruction, as this also is from time to
			time a necessary work, thou findest a like sequence and
			perseverance: for Luther it was as yet hot enough to
			stand by that burning of the Pope&#8217;s Bull; Voltaire
			could not warm himself at the glimmering ashes, but
			required quite other fuel. Thus likewise, I note, the
			English Whig has, in the second generation, become
			an English Radical; who, in the third again, it is to be
			hoped, will become an English Rebuilder. Find Mankind
			where thou wilt, thou findest it in living movement,
			in progress faster or slower: the Phœnix soars aloft,
			hovers with outstretched wings, filling Earth with her
			music; or, as now, she sinks, and with spheral swan-song
			immolates herself in flame, that she may soar the
			higher and sing the clearer.&#8217;</p>

			<p>Let the friends of social order, in such a disastrous
			period, lay this to heart, and derive from it any little
			comfort they can. We subjoin another passage, concerning
			Titles:</p>

			<p>&#8216;Remark, not without surprise,&#8217; says Teufelsdröckh,
			&#8216;how all high Titles of Honour come hitherto
			from fighting. Your <i>Herzog</i> (Duke, <i>Dux</i>) is Leader of
			Armies; your Earl (<i>Jarl</i>) is Strong Man; your Marshal
			cavalry Horse-shoer. A Millennium, or reign of Peace
			and Wisdom, having from of old been prophesied, and
			becoming now daily more and more indubitable, may it
			not be apprehended that such Fighting-titles will cease
			to be palatable, and new and higher need to be devised?</p>

			<p>&#8216;The only Title wherein I, with confidence, trace
			eternity, is that of King. <i>König</i> (King), anciently <i>Könning</i>,
			means Ken-ning (Cunning), or which is the same
			thing, Can-ning. Ever must the Sovereign of Mankind
			be fitly entitled King.&#8217;</p>

			<p>&#8216;Well, also,&#8217; says he elsewhere, &#8216;was it written by
			Theologians: a King rules by divine right. He carries
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page187" name="page187"></a>187</span>in him an authority from God, or man will never give
			it him. Can I choose my own King? I can choose my
			own King Popinjay, and play what farce or tragedy I
			may with him: but he who is to be my Ruler, whose
			will is to be higher than my will, was chosen for me in
			Heaven. Neither except in such Obedience to the
			Heaven-chosen is Freedom so much as conceivable.&#8217;</p>

			<p class="post_thoughtbreak">The Editor will here admit that, among all the wondrous
			provinces of Teufelsdröckh&#8217;s spiritual world, there
			is none he walks in with such astonishment, hesitation,
			and even pain, as in the Political. How, with our
			English love of Ministry and Opposition, and that
			generous conflict of Parties, mind warming itself against
			mind in their mutual wrestle for the Public Good, by
			which wrestle, indeed, is our invaluable Constitution
			kept warm and alive; how shall we domesticate ourselves
			in this spectral Necropolis, or rather City both of
			the Dead and of the Unborn, where the Present seems
			little other than an inconsiderable Film dividing the
			Past and the Future? In those dim longdrawn
			expanses, all is so immeasurable; much so disastrous,
			ghastly; your very radiances and straggling light-beams
			have a supernatural character. And then with
			such an indifference, such a prophetic peacefulness
			(accounting the inevitably coming as already here, to
			him all one whether it be distant by centuries or only
			by days), does he sit;&#8212;and live, you would say, rather
			in any other age than in his own! It is our painful duty
			to announce, or repeat, that, looking into this man, we
			discern a deep, silent, slow-burning, inextinguishable
			Radicalism, such as fills us with shuddering admiration.</p>

			<p>Thus, for example, he appears to make little even of
			the Elective Franchise; at least so we interpret the
			following: &#8216;Satisfy yourselves,&#8217; he says, &#8216;by universal,
			indubitable experiment, even as ye are now
			doing or will do, whether <span class="special_emphasis">Freedom</span>, heavenborn and
			leading heavenward, and so vitally essential for us all,
			cannot peradventure be mechanically hatched and
			brought to light in that same Ballot-Box of yours; or at
			worst, in some other discoverable or devisable Box,
			Edifice, or Steam-mechanism. It were a mighty convenience;
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page188" name="page188"></a>188</span>and beyond all feats of manufacture witnessed
			hitherto.&#8217; Is Teufelsdröckh acquainted with the
			British Constitution, even slightly?&#8212;He says, under
			another figure: &#8216;But after all, were the problem, as
			indeed it now everywhere is, To rebuild your old House
			from the top downwards (since you must live in it the
			while), what better, what other, than the Representative
			Machine will serve your turn? Meanwhile, however,
			mock me not with the name of Free, &#8220;when you
			have but knit-up my chains into ornamental festoons.&#8221;&#8217;&#8212;Or
			what will any member of the Peace Society make
			of such an assertion as this: &#8216;The lower people everywhere
			desire War. Not so unwisely; there is then a
			demand for lower people&#8212;to be shot!&#8217;</p>

			<p>Gladly, therefore, do we emerge from those soul-confusing
			labyrinths of speculative Radicalism, into
			somewhat clearer regions. Here, looking round, as
			was our hest, for &#8216;organic filaments,&#8217; we ask, may not
			this, touching &#8216;Hero-worship,&#8217; be of the number? It
			seems of a cheerful character; yet so quaint, so
			mystical, one knows not what, or how little, may lie
			under it. Our readers shall look with their own eyes:</p>

			<p>&#8216;True is it that, in these days, man can do almost
			all things, only not obey. True likewise that whoso
			cannot obey cannot be free, still less bear rule; he that
			is the inferior of nothing, can be the superior of nothing,
			the equal of nothing. Nevertheless, believe not that
			man has lost his faculty of Reverence; that if it slumber
			in him, it has gone dead. Painful for man is that same
			rebellious Independence, when it has become inevitable;
			only in loving companionship with his fellows does he
			feel safe; only in reverently bowing down before the
			Higher does he feel himself exalted.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Or what if the character of our so troublous Era
			lay even in this: that man had forever cast away Fear,
			which is the lower; but not yet risen into perennial
			Reverence, which is the higher and highest?</p>

			<p>&#8216;Meanwhile, observe with joy, so cunningly has
			Nature ordered it, that whatsoever man ought to obey,
			he cannot but obey. Before no faintest revelation of
			the Godlike did he ever stand irreverent; least of all,
			when the Godlike showed itself revealed in his fellow-man.
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page189" name="page189"></a>189</span>Thus is there a true religious Loyalty forever
			rooted in his heart; nay in all ages, even in ours, it
			manifests itself as a more or less orthodox <em>Hero-worship</em>.
			In which fact, that Hero-worship exists, has
			existed, and will forever exist, universally among Mankind,
			mayest thou discern the corner-stone of living-rock,
			whereon all Polities for the remotest time may
			stand secure.&#8217;</p>

			<p>Do our readers discern any such corner-stone, or
			even so much as what Teufelsdröckh is looking at? He
			exclaims, &#8216;Or hast thou forgotten Paris and Voltaire?
			How the aged, withered man, though but a Sceptic,
			Mocker, and millinery Court-poet, yet because even he
			seemed the Wisest, Best, could drag mankind at his
			chariot-wheels, so that princes coveted a smile from
			him, and the loveliest of France would have laid their
			hair beneath his feet! All Paris was one vast Temple
			of Hero-worship; though their Divinity, moreover, was
			of feature too apish.</p>

			<p>&#8216;But if such things,&#8217; continues he, &#8216;were done in
			the dry tree, what will be done in the green? If, in the
			most parched season of Man&#8217;s History, in the most
			parched spot of Europe, when Parisian life was at best
			but a scientific <i>Hortus Siccus</i>, bedizened with some
			Italian Gumflowers, such virtue could come out of it;
			what is to be looked for when Life again waves leafy
			and bloomy, and your Hero-Divinity shall have nothing
			apelike, but be wholly human? Know that there is in
			man a quite indestructible Reverence for whatsoever
			holds of Heaven, or even plausibly counterfeits such
			holding. Show the dullest clodpole, show the haughtiest
			featherhead, that a soul higher than himself is actually
			here; were his knees stiffened into brass, he must down
			and worship.&#8217;</p>

			<p>Organic filaments, of a more authentic sort, mysteriously
			spinning themselves, some will perhaps discover
			in the following passage:</p>

			<p>&#8216;There is no Church, sayest thou? The voice of
			Prophecy has gone dumb? This is even what I dispute:
			but in any case, hast thou not still Preaching
			enough? A Preaching Friar settles himself in every
			village; and builds a pulpit, which he calls Newspaper.
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page190" name="page190"></a>190</span>Therefrom he preaches what most momentous doctrine
			is in him, for man&#8217;s salvation; and dost not thou listen,
			and believe? Look well, thou seest everywhere a new
			Clergy of the Mendicant Orders, some bare-footed, some
			almost bare-backed, fashion itself into shape, and teach
			and preach, zealously enough, for copper alms and the
			love of God. These break in pieces the ancient idols;
			and, though themselves too often reprobate, as idol-breakers
			are wont to be, mark out the sites of new
			Churches, where the true God-ordained, that are to
			follow, may find audience, and minister. Said I not,
			Before the old skin was shed, the new had formed itself
			beneath it?&#8217;</p>

			<p>Perhaps also in the following; wherewith we now
			hasten to knit-up this ravelled sleeve:</p>

			<p>&#8216;But there is no Religion?&#8217; reiterates the Professor.
			&#8216;Fool! I tell thee, there is. Hast thou well considered
			all that lies in this immeasurable froth-ocean we name
			<span class="special_emphasis">Literature</span>? Fragments of a genuine Church-<em>Homiletic</em>
			lie scattered there, which Time will assort: nay
			fractions even of a <i>Liturgy</i> could I point out. And
			knowest thou no Prophet, even in the vesture, environment,
			and dialect of this age? None to whom the God-like
			had revealed itself, through all meanest and highest
			forms of the Common; and by him been again prophetically
			revealed: in whose inspired melody, even in these
			rag-gathering and rag-burning days, Man&#8217;s Life again
			begins, were it but afar off, to be divine? Knowest
			thou none such? I know him, and name him&#8212;Goethe.</p>

			<p>&#8216;But thou as yet standest in no Temple; joinest in
			no Psalm-worship; feelest well that, where there is no
			ministering Priest, the people perish? Be of comfort!
			Thou art not alone, if thou have Faith. Spake we not
			of a Communion of Saints, unseen, yet not unreal,
			accompanying and brother-like embracing thee, so thou
			be worthy? Their heroic Sufferings rise up melodiously
			together to Heaven, out of all lands, and out of all
			times, as a sacred <i>Miserere</i>; their heroic Actions also,
			as a boundless everlasting Psalm of Triumph. Neither
			say that thou hast now no Symbol of the Godlike. Is
			not God&#8217;s Universe a Symbol of the Godlike; is not
			Immensity a Temple; is not Man&#8217;s History, and Men&#8217;s
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page191" name="page191"></a>191</span>History, a perpetual Evangel? Listen, and for organ-music
			thou wilt ever, as of old, hear the Morning Stars
			sing together.&#8217;</p>

		</div>
		<div id="book_3_chapter_8" class="chapter">
			<p class="chapter_head">CHAPTER VIII</p>

			<h3 class="chapter_title">NATURAL SUPERNATURALISM</h3>

			<p><span class="first_word">It</span> is in his stupendous Section, headed <i>Natural Supernaturalism</i>,
			that the Professor first becomes a Seer;
			and, after long effort, such as we have witnessed,
			finally subdues under his feet this refractory Clothes-Philosophy,
			and takes victorious possession thereof.
			Phantasms enough he has had to struggle with;
			&#8216;Cloth-webs and Cob-webs,&#8217; of Imperial Mantles, Superannuated
			Symbols, and what not: yet still did he courageously
			pierce through. Nay, worst of all, two quite
			mysterious, world-embracing Phantasms, <span class="special_emphasis">Time</span> and
			<span class="special_emphasis">Space</span>, have ever hovered round him, perplexing and
			bewildering: but with these also he now resolutely
			grapples, these also he victoriously rends asunder. In
			a word, he has looked fixedly on Existence, till, one
			after the other, its earthly hulls and garnitures have all
			melted away; and now, to his rapt vision, the interior
			celestial Holy of Holies lies disclosed.</p>

			<p>Here, therefore, properly it is that the Philosophy of
			Clothes attains to Transcendentalism; this last leap, can
			we but clear it, takes us safe into the promised land,
			where <i>Palingenesia</i>, in all senses, may be considered
			as beginning. &#8216;Courage, then!&#8217; may our Diogenes
			exclaim, with better right than Diogenes the First once
			did. This stupendous Section we, after long painful
			meditation, have found not to be unintelligible; but, on
			the contrary, to grow clear, nay radiant, and all-illuminating.
			Let the reader, turning on it what
			utmost force of speculative intellect is in him, do his
			part; as we, by judicious selection and adjustment, shall
			study to do ours:</p>

			<p>&#8216;Deep has been, and is, the significance of Miracles,&#8217;
			thus quietly begins the Professor; &#8216;far deeper perhaps
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page192" name="page192"></a>192</span>than we imagine. Meanwhile, the question of questions
			were: What specially is a Miracle? To that Dutch
			King of Siam, an icicle had been a miracle; whoso had
			carried with him an air-pump, and vial of vitriolic
			ether, might have worked a miracle. To my Horse,
			again, who unhappily is still more unscientific, do not
			I work a miracle, and magical &#8220;<em>Open sesame!</em>&#8221; every
			time I please to pay twopence, and open for him an
			impassable <i>Schlagbaum</i>, or shut Turnpike?</p>

			<p>&#8216;&#8220;But is not a real Miracle simply a violation of the
			Laws of Nature?&#8221; ask several. Whom I answer by
			this new question: What are the Laws of Nature? To
			me perhaps the rising of one from the dead were no
			violation of these Laws, but a confirmation; were some
			far deeper Law, now first penetrated into, and by
			Spiritual Force, even as the rest have all been, brought
			to bear on us with its Material Force.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Here too may some inquire, not without astonishment:
			On what ground shall one, that can make Iron
			swim, come and declare that therefore he can teach
			Religion? To us, truly, of the Nineteenth Century,
			such declaration were inept enough; which nevertheless
			to our fathers, of the First Century, was full of
			meaning.</p>

			<p>&#8216;&#8220;But is it not the deepest Law of Nature that she
			be constant?&#8221; cries an illuminated class: &#8220;Is not the
			Machine of the Universe fixed to move by unalterable
			rules?&#8221; Probable enough, good friends: nay I, too,
			must believe that the God, whom ancient inspired men
			assert to be &#8220;without variableness or shadow of turning,&#8221;
			does indeed never change; that Nature, that the
			Universe, which no one whom it so pleases can be prevented
			from calling a Machine, does move by the most
			unalterable rules. And now of you, too, I make the old
			inquiry: What those same unalterable rules, forming
			the complete Statute-Book of Nature, may possibly be?</p>

			<p>&#8216;They stand written in our Works of Science, say
			you; in the accumulated records of Man&#8217;s Experience?&#8212;Was
			Man with his Experience present at the Creation,
			then, to see how it all went on? Have any deepest
			scientific individuals yet dived-down to the foundations
			of the Universe, and gauged everything there? Did
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page193" name="page193"></a>193</span>the Maker take them into His counsel; that they read
			His groundplan of the incomprehensible All; and can
			say, This stands marked therein, and no more than this?
			Alas, not in anywise! These scientific individuals have
			been nowhere but where we also are; have seen some
			handbreadths deeper than we see into the Deep that is
			infinite, without bottom as without shore.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Laplace&#8217;s Book on the Stars, wherein he exhibits
			that certain Planets, with their Satellites, gyrate round
			our worthy Sun, at a rate and in a course, which, by
			greatest good fortune, he and the like of him have succeeded
			in detecting,&#8212;is to me as precious as to another.
			But is this what thou namest &#8220;Mechanism of the
			Heavens,&#8221; and &#8220;System of the World&#8221;; this, wherein
			Sirius and the Pleiades, and all Herschel&#8217;s Fifteen-thousand
			Suns per minute, being left out, some paltry
			handful of Moons, and inert Balls, had been&#8212;looked at,
			nicknamed, and marked in the Zodiacal Way-bill; so
			that we can now prate of their Whereabout; their How,
			their Why, their What, being hid from us, as in the
			signless Inane?</p>

			<p>&#8216;System of Nature! To the wisest man, wide as
			is his vision, Nature remains of quite <em>infinite</em> depth, of
			quite infinite expansion; and all Experience thereof
			limits itself to some few computed centuries and
			measured square-miles. The course of Nature&#8217;s phases,
			on this our little fraction of a Planet, is partially known
			to us: but who knows what deeper courses these depend
			on; what infinitely larger Cycle (of causes) our little
			Epicycle revolves on? To the Minnow every cranny
			and pebble, and quality and accident, of its little native
			Creek may have become familiar: but does the Minnow
			understand the Ocean Tides and periodic Currents, the
			Trade-winds, and Monsoons, and Moon&#8217;s Eclipses; by
			all which the condition of its little Creek is regulated,
			and may, from time to time (<em>un</em>miraculously enough),
			be quite overset and reversed? Such a Minnow is Man;
			his Creek this Planet Earth; his Ocean the immeasurable
			All; his Monsoons and periodic Currents the
			mysterious Course of Providence through Æons of
			Æons.</p>

			<p>&#8216;We speak of the Volume of Nature: and truly a
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page194" name="page194"></a>194</span>Volume it is,&#8212;whose Author and Writer is God. To
			read it! Dost thou, does man, so much as well know
			the Alphabet thereof? With its Words, Sentences,
			and grand descriptive Pages, poetical and philosophical,
			spread out through Solar Systems, and Thousands of
			Years, we shall not try thee. It is a Volume written
			in celestial hieroglyphs, in the true Sacred-writing; of
			which even Prophets are happy that they can read here
			a line and there a line. As for your Institutes, and
			Academies of Science, they strive bravely; and, from
			amid the thick-crowded, inextricably intertwisted hieroglyphic
			writing, pick-out, by dextrous combination,
			some Letters in the vulgar Character, and therefrom put
			together this and the other economic Recipe, of high
			avail in Practice. That Nature is more than some
			boundless Volume of such Recipes, or huge, well-nigh
			inexhaustible Domestic-Cookery Book, of which the
			whole secret will in this manner one day evolve itself,
			the fewest dream.</p>

			<p class="post_thoughtbreak">&#8216;Custom,&#8217; continues the Professor, &#8216;doth make
			dotards of us all. Consider well, thou wilt find that
			Custom is the greatest of Weavers; and weaves air-raiment
			for all the Spirits of the Universe; whereby
			indeed these dwell with us visibly, as ministering
			servants, in our houses and workshops; but their
			spiritual nature becomes, to the most, forever hidden.
			Philosophy complains that Custom has hoodwinked us,
			from the first; that we do everything by Custom, even
			Believe by it; that our very Axioms, let us boast of
			Free-thinking as we may, are oftenest simply such
			Beliefs as we have never heard questioned. Nay, what
			is Philosophy throughout but a continual battle against
			Custom; an ever-renewed effort to <em>transcend</em> the sphere
			of blind Custom, and so become Transcendental?</p>

			<p>&#8216;Innumerable are the illusions and legerdemain-tricks
			of Custom: but of all these, perhaps the cleverest is
			her knack of persuading us that the Miraculous, by
			simple repetition, ceases to be Miraculous. True, it is
			by this means we live; for man must work as well as
			wonder: and herein is Custom so far a kind nurse,
			guiding him to his true benefit. But she is a fond
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page195" name="page195"></a>195</span>foolish nurse, or rather we are false foolish nurslings,
			when, in our resting and reflecting hours, we prolong
			the same deception. Am I to view the Stupendous with
			stupid indifference, because I have seen it twice, or two-hundred,
			or two-million times? There is no reason in
			Nature or in Art why I should: unless, indeed, I am a
			mere Work-Machine, for whom the divine gift of
			Thought were no other than the terrestrial gift of Steam
			is to the Steam-engine; a power whereby Cotton might
			be spun, and money and money&#8217;s worth realised.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Notable enough too, here as elsewhere, wilt thou
			find the potency of Names; which indeed are but one
			kind of such custom-woven, wonder-hiding Garments.
			Witchcraft, and all manner of Spectre-work, and
			Demonology, we have now named Madness and Diseases
			of the Nerves. Seldom reflecting that still the
			new question comes upon us: What is Madness, what
			are Nerves? Ever, as before, does Madness remain a
			mysterious-terrific, altogether <em>infernal</em> boiling-up of the
			Nether Chaotic Deep, through this fair-painted Vision
			of Creation, which swims thereon, which we name the
			Real. Was Luther&#8217;s Picture of the Devil less a Reality,
			whether it were formed within the bodily eye, or without
			it? In every the wisest Soul lies a whole world of
			internal Madness, an authentic Demon Empire; out of
			which, indeed, his world of Wisdom has been creatively
			built together, and now rests there, as on its dark
			foundations does a habitable flowery Earth-rind.</p>

			<p class="post_thoughtbreak">&#8216;But deepest of all illusory Appearances, for hiding
			Wonder, as for many other ends, are your two grand
			fundamental world-enveloping Appearances, <span class="special_emphasis">Space</span> and
			<span class="special_emphasis">Time</span>. These, as spun and woven for us from before
			Birth itself, to clothe our celestial <span class="special_emphasis">Me</span> for dwelling here,
			and yet to blind it,&#8212;lie all embracing, as the universal
			canvas, or warp and woof, whereby all minor Illusions,
			in this Phantasm Existence, weave and paint themselves.
			In vain, while here on Earth, shall you endeavour
			to strip them off; you can, at best, but rend them
			asunder for moments, and look through.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Fortunatus had a wishing Hat, which when he put
			on, and wished himself Anywhere, behold he was There.
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page196" name="page196"></a>196</span>By this means had Fortunatus triumphed over Space,
			he had annihilated Space; for him there was no Where,
			but all was Here. Were a Hatter to establish himself,
			in the Wahngasse of Weissnichtwo, and make felts of
			this sort for all mankind, what a world we should have
			of it! Still stranger, should, on the opposite side of
			the street, another Hatter establish himself; and as his
			fellow-craftsman made Space-annihilating Hats, make
			Time-annihilating! Of both would I purchase, were it
			with my last groschen; but chiefly of this latter. To
			clap-on your felt, and, simply by wishing that you were
			Any<em>where</em>, straightway to be <em>There</em>! Next to clap-on
			your other felt, and, simply by wishing that you were
			Any<em>when</em>, straightway to be <em>Then</em>! This were indeed
			the grander: shooting at will from the Fire-Creation of
			the World to its Fire-Consummation; here historically
			present in the First Century, conversing face to face
			with Paul and Seneca; there prophetically in the Thirty-first,
			conversing also face to face with other Pauls and
			Senecas, who as yet stand hidden in the depth of that
			late Time!</p>

			<p>&#8216;Or thinkest thou it were impossible, unimaginable?
			Is the Past annihilated, then, or only past; is the Future
			non-extant, or only future? Those mystic faculties of
			thine, Memory and Hope, already answer: already
			through those mystic avenues, thou the Earth-blinded
			summonest both Past and Future, and communest with
			them, though as yet darkly, and with mute beckonings.
			The curtains of Yesterday drop down, the curtains of
			Tomorrow roll up; but Yesterday and Tomorrow both
			<em>are</em>. Pierce through the Time-element, glance into the
			Eternal. Believe what thou findest written in the sanctuaries
			of Man&#8217;s Soul, even as all Thinkers, in all ages,
			have devoutly read it there: that Time and Space are
			not God, but creations of God: that with God as it is
			a universal <span class="special_emphasis">Here</span>, so is it an everlasting <span class="special_emphasis">Now</span>.</p>

			<p>&#8216;And seest thou therein any glimpse of <span class="special_emphasis">Immortality</span>?&#8212;O
			Heaven! Is the white Tomb of our Loved One,
			who died from our arms, and had to be left behind
			us there, which rises in the distance, like a pale, mournfully
			receding Milestone, to tell how many toilsome
			uncheered miles we have journeyed on alone,&#8212;but a
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page197" name="page197"></a>197</span>pale spectral Illusion! Is the lost Friend still mysteriously
			Here, even as we are Here mysteriously, with
			God!&#8212;Know of a truth that only the Time-shadows
			have perished, or are perishable; that the real Being
			of whatever was, and whatever is, and whatever will
			be, <em>is</em> even now and forever. This, should it unhappily
			seem new, thou mayest ponder at thy leisure; for the
			next twenty years, or the next twenty centuries: believe
			it thou must; understand it thou canst not.</p>

			<p>&#8216;That the Thought-forms, Space and Time, wherein,
			once for all, we are sent into this Earth to live, should
			condition and determine our whole Practical reasonings,
			conceptions, and imagines or imaginings,&#8212;seems altogether
			fit, just, and unavoidable. But that they should,
			furthermore, usurp such sway over pure spiritual Meditation,
			and blind us to the wonder everywhere lying close
			on us, seems nowise so. Admit Space and Time to their
			due rank as Forms of Thought; nay even, if thou wilt,
			to their quite undue rank of Realities: and consider,
			then, with thyself how their thin disguises hide from
			us the brightest God-effulgences! Thus, were it not
			miraculous, could I stretch forth my hand and clutch the
			Sun? Yet thou seest me daily stretch forth my hand
			and therewith clutch many a thing, and swing it hither
			and thither. Art thou a grown baby, then, to fancy
			that the Miracle lies in miles of distance, or in pounds
			avoirdupois of weight; and not to see that the true
			inexplicable God-revealing Miracle lies in this, that I
			can stretch forth my hand at all; that I have free Force
			to clutch aught therewith? Innumerable other of this
			sort are the deceptions, and wonder-hiding stupefactions,
			which Space practises on us.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Still worse is it with regard to Time. Your grand
			anti-magician, and universal wonder-hider, is this same
			lying Time. Had we but the Time-annihilating Hat, to
			put on for once only, we should see ourselves in a
			World of Miracles, wherein all fabled or authentic Thaumaturgy,
			and feats of Magic, were outdone. But
			unhappily we have not such a Hat; and man, poor fool
			that he is, can seldom and scantily help himself without
			one.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Were it not wonderful, for instance, had Orpheus,
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page198" name="page198"></a>198</span>or Amphion, built the walls of Thebes by the mere sound
			of his Lyre? Yet tell me, Who built these walls of
			Weissnichtwo; summoning-out all the sandstone rocks,
			to dance along from the <i>Steinbruch</i> (now a huge Troglodyte
			Chasm, with frightful green-mantled pools); and
			shape themselves into Doric and Ionic pillars, squared
			ashlar houses and noble streets? Was it not the still
			higher Orpheus, or Orpheuses, who, in past centuries,
			by the divine Music of Wisdom, succeeded in civilising
			Man? Our highest Orpheus walked in Judea, eighteen
			hundred years ago: his sphere-melody, flowing in wild
			native tones, took captive the ravished souls of men;
			and, being of a truth sphere-melody, still flows and
			sounds, though now with thousandfold accompaniments,
			and rich symphonies, through all our hearts; and modulates,
			and divinely leads them. Is that a wonder, which
			happens in two hours; and does it cease to be wonderful
			if happening in two million? Not only was Thebes
			built by the music of an Orpheus; but without the music
			of some inspired Orpheus was no city ever built, no
			work that man glories-in ever done.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Sweep away the Illusion of Time; glance, if thou
			hast eyes, from the near moving-cause to its far-distant
			Mover: The stroke that came transmitted through a
			whole galaxy of elastic balls, was it less a stroke than
			if the last ball only had been struck, and sent flying?
			O, could I (with the Time-annihilating Hat) transport
			thee direct from the Beginnings to the Endings, how
			were thy eyesight unsealed, and thy heart set flaming
			in the Light-sea of celestial wonder! Then sawest thou
			that this fair Universe, were it in the meanest province
			thereof, is in very deed the star-domed City of God;
			that through every star, through every grass-blade, and
			most through every Living Soul, the glory of a present
			God still beams. But Nature, which is the Time-vesture
			of God, and reveals Him to the wise, hides Him from
			the foolish.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Again, could anything be more miraculous than an
			actual authentic Ghost? The English Johnson longed,
			all his life, to see one; but could not, though he went
			to Cock Lane, and thence to the church-vaults, and
			tapped on coffins. Foolish Doctor! Did he never,
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page199" name="page199"></a>199</span>with the mind&#8217;s eye as well as with the body&#8217;s, look
			round him into that full tide of human Life he so loved;
			did he never so much as look into Himself? The good
			Doctor was a Ghost, as actual and authentic as heart
			could wish; well-nigh a million of Ghosts were travelling
			the streets by his side. Once more I say, sweep away
			the illusion of Time; compress the threescore years into
			three minutes: what else was he, what else are we?
			Are we not Spirits, that are shaped into a body, into an
			Appearance; and that fade-away again into air and
			Invisibility? This is no metaphor, it is a simple scientific
			<em>fact</em>: we start out of Nothingness, take figure, and
			are Apparitions; round us, as round the veriest spectre,
			is Eternity; and to Eternity minutes are as years and
			æons. Come there not tones of Love and Faith, as
			from celestial harp-strings, like the Song of beautified
			Souls? And again, do not we squeak and jibber (in
			our discordant, screech-owlish debatings and recriminatings);
			and glide bodeful, and feeble, and fearful; or
			uproar (<i>poltern</i>), and revel in our mad Dance of the
			Dead,&#8212;till the scent of the morning air summons us to
			our still Home; and dreamy Night becomes awake and
			Day? Where now is Alexander of Macedon: does the
			steel Host, that yelled in fierce battle-shouts at Issus
			and Arbela, remain behind him; or have they all
			vanished utterly, even as perturbed Goblins must?
			Napoleon too, and his Moscow Retreats and Austerlitz
			Campaigns! Was it all other than the veriest Spectre-hunt;
			which has now, with its howling tumult that
			made Night hideous, flitted away?&#8212;Ghosts! There are
			nigh a thousand-million walking the Earth openly at
			noontide; some half-hundred have vanished from it,
			some half-hundred have arisen in it, ere thy watch ticks
			once.</p>

			<p>&#8216;O Heaven, it is mysterious, it is awful to consider
			that we not only carry each a future Ghost within him;
			but are, in very deed, Ghosts! These Limbs, whence
			had we them; this stormy Force; this life-blood with its
			burning Passion? They are dust and shadow; a
			Shadow-system gathered round our <span class="special_emphasis">Me</span>; wherein,
			through some moments or years, the Divine Essence is
			to be revealed in the Flesh. That warrior on his strong
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page200" name="page200"></a>200</span>war-horse, fire flashes through his eyes; force dwells in
			his arm and heart: but warrior and war-horse are a
			vision; a revealed Force, nothing more. Stately they
			tread the Earth, as if it were a firm substance: fool! the
			earth is but a film; it cracks in twain, and warrior and
			war-horse sink beyond plummet&#8217;s sounding. Plummet&#8217;s?
			Fantasy herself will not follow them. A little
			while ago, they were not; a little while, and they are
			not, their very ashes are not.</p>

			<p>&#8216;So has it been from the beginning, so will it be to
			the end. Generation after generation takes to itself the
			Form of a Body; and forth-issuing from Cimmerian
			Night, on Heaven&#8217;s mission <span class="special_emphasis_smaller">APPEARS</span>. What Force and
			Fire is in each he expends: one grinding in the mill of
			Industry; one hunter-like climbing the giddy Alpine
			heights of Science; one madly dashed in pieces on the
			rocks of Strife, in war with his fellow:&#8212;and then the
			Heaven-sent is recalled; his earthly Vesture falls away,
			and soon even to Sense becomes a vanished Shadow.
			Thus, like some wild-flaming, wild-thundering train of
			Heaven&#8217;s Artillery, does this mysterious <span class="special_emphasis">Mankind</span>
			thunder and flame, in long-drawn, quick-succeeding
			grandeur, through the unknown Deep. Thus, like a
			God-created, fire-breathing Spirit-host, we emerge from
			the Inane; haste stormfully across the astonished Earth;
			then plunge again into the Inane. Earth&#8217;s mountains
			are levelled, and her seas filled up, in our passage: can
			the Earth, which is but dead and a vision, resist Spirits
			which have reality and are alive? On the hardest
			adamant some footprint of us is stamped-in; the last
			Rear of the host will read traces of the earliest Van.
			But whence?&#8212;O Heaven, whither? Sense knows not;
			Faith knows not; only that it is through Mystery to
			Mystery, from God and to God.</p>

			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p class="i10">&#8220;We <em>are such stuff</em></p>
					<p>As Dreams are made of, and our little Life</p>
					<p>Is rounded with a sleep!&#8221;&#8217;</p>
				</div>
			</div>

		</div>
		<div id="book_3_chapter_9" class="chapter">
			<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page201" name="page201"></a>201</span></p>

			<p class="chapter_head">CHAPTER IX</p>

			<h3 class="chapter_title">CIRCUMSPECTIVE</h3>


			<p><span class="first_word">Here</span>, then, arises the so momentous question: Have
			many British Readers actually arrived with us at the
			new promised country; is the Philosophy of Clothes now
			at last opening around them? Long and adventurous
			has the journey been: from those outmost vulgar, palpable
			Woollen-Hulls of Man; through his wondrous
			Flesh-Garments, and his wondrous Social Garnitures;
			inwards to the Garments of his very Soul&#8217;s Soul, to
			Time and Space themselves! And now does the
			Spiritual, eternal Essence of Man, and of Mankind,
			bared of such wrappages, begin in any measure to reveal
			itself? Can many readers discern, as through a glass
			darkly, in huge wavering outlines, some primeval rudiments
			of Man&#8217;s Being, what is changeable divided from
			what is unchangeable? Does that Earth-Spirit&#8217;s speech
			in <i>Faust</i>,&#8212;</p>

			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>&#8216;&#8217;Tis thus at the roaring Loom of Time I ply,</p>
					<p>And weave for God the Garment thou see&#8217;st Him by&#8217;;</p>
				</div>
			</div>

			<p class="continued">or that other thousand-times repeated speech of the
			Magician, Shakspeare,&#8212;</p>

			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>&#8216;And like the baseless fabric of this vision,</p>
					<p>The cloudcapt Towers, the gorgeous Palaces,</p>
					<p>The solemn Temples, the great Globe itself,</p>
					<p>And all which it inherit, shall dissolve;</p>
					<p>And like this unsubstantial pageant faded,</p>
					<p>Leave not a wrack behind&#8217;;</p>
				</div>
			</div>

			<p class="continued">begin to have some meaning for us? In a word, do
			we at length stand safe in the far region of Poetic
			Creation and Palingenesia, where that Phœnix Death-Birth
			of Human Society, and of all Human Things,
			appears possible, is seen to be inevitable?</p>

			<p>Along this most insufficient, unheard-of Bridge, which
			the Editor, by Heaven&#8217;s blessing, has now seen himself
			enabled to conclude if not complete, it cannot be his
			sober calculation, but only his fond hope, that many have
			travelled without accident. No firm arch, overspanning
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page202" name="page202"></a>202</span>the Impassable with paved highway, could the Editor
			construct; only, as was said, some zigzag series of rafts
			floating tumultuously thereon. Alas, and the leaps
			from raft to raft were too often of a breakneck character;
			the darkness, the nature of the element, all was
			against us!</p>

			<p>Nevertheless, may not here and there one of a thousand,
			provided with a discursiveness of intellect rare in
			our day, have cleared the passage, in spite of all?
			Happy few! little band of Friends! be welcome, be of
			courage. By degrees, the eye grows accustomed to its
			new Whereabout; the hand can stretch itself forth to
			work there: it is in this grand and indeed highest work
			of Palingenesia that ye shall labour, each according to
			ability. New labourers will arrive; new Bridges will
			be built; nay, may not our own poor rope-and-raft
			Bridge, in your passings and repassings, be mended in
			many a point, till it grow quite firm, passable even for
			the halt?</p>

			<p>Meanwhile, of the innumerable multitude that started
			with us, joyous and full of hope, where now is the
			innumerable remainder, whom we see no longer by our
			side? The most have recoiled, and stand gazing afar
			off, in unsympathetic astonishment, at our career: not
			a few, pressing forward with more courage, have missed
			footing, or leaped short; and now swim weltering in the
			Chaos-flood, some towards this shore, some towards
			that. To these also a helping hand should be held out;
			at least some word of encouragement be said.</p>

			<p>Or, to speak without metaphor, with which mode of
			utterance Teufelsdröckh unhappily has somewhat infected
			us,&#8212;can it be hidden from the Editor that many
			a British Reader sits reading quite bewildered in head,
			and afflicted rather than instructed by the present Work?
			Yes, long ago has many a British Reader been, as now,
			demanding with something like a snarl: Whereto does
			all this lead; or what use is in it?</p>

			<p>In the way of replenishing thy purse, or otherwise
			aiding thy digestive faculty, O British Reader, it leads
			to nothing, and there is no use in it; but rather the
			reverse, for it costs thee somewhat. Nevertheless, if
			through this unpromising Horn-gate, Teufelsdröckh,
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page203" name="page203"></a>203</span>and we by means of him, have led thee into the true
			Land of Dreams; and through the Clothes-screen, as
			through a magical <i>Pierre-Pertuis</i>, thou lookest, even for
			moments, into the region of the Wonderful, and seest
			and feelest that thy daily life is girt with Wonder, and
			based on Wonder, and thy very blankets and breeches
			are Miracles,&#8212;then art thou profited beyond money&#8217;s
			worth; and hast a thankfulness towards our Professor;
			nay, perhaps in many a literary Tea-circle wilt open thy
			kind lips, and audibly express that same.</p>

			<p>Nay farther, art not thou too perhaps by this time
			made aware that all Symbols are properly Clothes; that
			all Forms whereby Spirit manifests itself to sense,
			whether outwardly or in the imagination, are Clothes;
			and thus not only the parchment Magna Charta, which
			a Tailor was nigh cutting into measures, but the Pomp
			and Authority of Law, the sacredness of Majesty, and
			all inferior Worships (Worthships) are properly a
			Vesture and Raiment; and the Thirty-nine Articles
			themselves are articles of wearing-apparel (for the
			Religious Idea)? In which case, must it not also be
			admitted that this Science of Clothes is a high one, and
			may with infinitely deeper study on thy part yield richer
			fruit: that it takes scientific rank beside Codification,
			and Political Economy, and the Theory of the British
			Constitution; nay rather, from its prophetic height looks
			down on all these, as on so many weaving-shops and
			spinning-mills, where the Vestures which <em>it</em> has to
			fashion, and consecrate and distribute, are, too often by
			haggard hungry operatives who see no farther than
			their nose, mechanically woven and spun?</p>

			<p>But omitting all this, much more all that concerns
			Natural Supernaturalism, and indeed whatever has
			reference to the Ulterior or Transcendental portion of
			the Science, or bears never so remotely on that promised
			Volume of the <i>Palingenesie der menschlichen Gesellschaft</i>
			(Newbirth of Society),&#8212;we humbly suggest that
			no province of Clothes-Philosophy, even the lowest, is
			without its direct value, but that innumerable inferences
			of a practical nature may be drawn therefrom. To say
			nothing of those pregnant considerations, ethical,
			political, symbolical, which crowd on the Clothes-Philosopher
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page204" name="page204"></a>204</span>from the very threshold of his Science; nothing
			even of those &#8216;architectural ideas,&#8217; which, as we have
			seen, lurk at the bottom of all Modes, and will one day,
			better unfolding themselves, lead to important revolutions,&#8212;let
			us glance for a moment, and with the
			faintest light of Clothes-Philosophy, on what may be
			called the Habilatory Class of our fellow-men. Here
			too overlooking, where so much were to be looked on,
			the million spinners, weavers, fullers, dyers, washers,
			and wringers, that puddle and muddle in their dark
			recesses, to make us Clothes, and die that we may live,&#8212;let
			us but turn the reader&#8217;s attention upon two small
			divisions of mankind, who, like moths, may be regarded
			as Cloth-animals, creatures that live, move and have
			their being in Cloth: we mean, Dandies and Tailors.</p>

			<p>In regard to both which small divisions it may be
			asserted without scruple, that the public feeling, unenlightened
			by Philosophy, is at fault; and even that the
			dictates of humanity are violated. As will perhaps
			abundantly appear to readers of the two following
			chapters.</p>

		</div>
		<div id="book_3_chapter_10" class="chapter">
			<p class="chapter_head">CHAPTER X</p>
			<h3 class="chapter_title">THE DANDIACAL BODY</h3>

			<p><span class="first_word">First</span>, touching Dandies, let us consider, with some
			scientific strictness, what a Dandy specially is. A
			Dandy is a Clothes-wearing Man, a Man whose trade,
			office and existence consists in the wearing of Clothes.
			Every faculty of his soul, spirit, purse and person is
			heroically consecrated to this one object, the wearing
			of Clothes wisely and well: so that as others dress to
			live, he lives to dress. The all-importance of Clothes,
			which a German Professor of unequalled learning and
			acumen, writes his enormous Volume to demonstrate,
			has sprung up in the intellect of the Dandy without
			effort, like an instinct of genius; he is inspired with
			Cloth, a Poet of Cloth. What Teufelsdröckh would
			call a &#8216;Divine Idea of Cloth&#8217; is born with him; and
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page205" name="page205"></a>205</span>this, like other such Ideas, will express itself outwardly,
			or wring his heart asunder with unutterable throes.</p>

			<p>But, like a generous, creative enthusiast, he fearlessly
			makes his Idea an Action; shows himself in peculiar
			guise to mankind; walks forth, a witness and living
			Martyr to the eternal worth of Clothes. We called him
			a Poet: is not his body the (stuffed) parchment-skin
			whereon he writes, with cunning Huddersfield dyes, a
			Sonnet to his mistress&#8217; eyebrow? Say, rather, an Epos,
			and <i>Clotha Virumque cano</i>, to the whole world, in
			Macaronic verses, which he that runs may read. Nay,
			if you grant, what seems to be admissible, that the
			Dandy has a Thinking-principle in him, and some
			notions of Time and Space, is there not in this Life-devotedness
			to Cloth, in this so willing sacrifice of the
			Immortal to the Perishable, something (though in
			reverse order) of that blending and identification of
			Eternity with Time, which, as we have seen, constitutes
			the Prophetic character?</p>

			<p>And now, for all this perennial Martyrdom, and Poesy,
			and even Prophecy, what is it that the Dandy asks in
			return? Solely, we may say, that you would recognise
			his existence; would admit him to be a living object;
			or even failing this, a visual object, or thing that will
			reflect rays of light. Your silver or your gold (beyond
			what the niggardly Law has already secured him) he
			solicits not; simply the glance of your eyes. Understand
			his mystic significance, or altogether miss and
			misinterpret it; do but look at him, and he is contented.
			May we not well cry shame on an ungrateful world,
			which refuses even this poor boon; which will waste
			its optic faculty on dried Crocodiles, and Siamese Twins;
			and over the domestic wonderful wonder of wonders, a
			live Dandy, glance with hasty indifference, and a
			scarcely concealed contempt! Him no Zoologist classes
			among the Mammalia, no Anatomist dissects with care:
			when did we see any injected Preparation of the Dandy
			in our Museums; any specimen of him preserved in
			spirits? Lord Herringbone may dress himself in a snuff-brown
			suit, with snuff-brown shirt and shoes: it skills
			not; the undiscerning public, occupied with grosser
			wants, passes by regardless on the other side.</p>

			<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page206" name="page206"></a>206</span>The age of Curiosity, like that of Chivalry, is indeed,
			properly speaking, gone. Yet perhaps only gone to
			sleep: for here arises the Clothes-Philosophy to resuscitate,
			strangely enough, both the one and the other!
			Should sound views of this Science come to prevail, the
			essential nature of the British Dandy, and the mystic
			significance that lies in him, cannot always remain
			hidden under laughable and lamentable hallucination.
			The following long Extract from Professor Teufelsdröckh
			may set the matter, if not in its true light, yet in
			the way towards such. It is to be regretted, however,
			that here, as so often elsewhere, the Professor&#8217;s keen
			philosophic perspicacity is somewhat marred by a certain
			mixture of almost owlish purblindness, or else of some
			perverse, ineffectual, ironic tendency; our readers shall
			judge which:</p>

			<p class="post_thoughtbreak">&#8216;In these distracted times,&#8217; writes he, &#8216;when the
			Religious Principle, driven-out of most Churches, either
			lies unseen in the hearts of good men, looking and longing
			and silently working there towards some new Revelation;
			or else wanders homeless over the world, like a
			disembodied soul seeking its terrestrial organisation,&#8212;into
			how many strange shapes, of Superstition and
			Fanaticism, does it not tentatively and errantly cast itself!
			The higher Enthusiasm of man&#8217;s nature is for
			the while without Exponent; yet does it continue indestructible,
			unweariedly active, and work blindly in the
			great chaotic deep: thus Sect after Sect, and Church
			after Church, bodies itself forth, and melts again into
			new metamorphosis.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Chiefly is this observable in England, which, as the
			wealthiest and worst-instructed of European nations,
			offers precisely the elements (of Heat, namely, and of
			Darkness), in which such moon-calves and monstrosities
			are best generated. Among the newer Sects of that
			country, one of the most notable, and closely connected
			with our present subject, is that of the <i>Dandies</i>; concerning
			which, what little information I have been able
			to procure may fitly stand here.</p>

			<p>&#8216;It is true, certain of the English Journalists, men
			generally without sense for the Religious Principle, or
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page207" name="page207"></a>207</span>judgment for its manifestations, speak, in their brief
			enigmatic notices, as if this were perhaps rather a
			Secular Sect, and not a Religious one; nevertheless, to
			the psychologic eye its devotional and even sacrificial
			character plainly enough reveals itself. Whether it belongs
			to the class of Fetish-worships, or of Hero-worships
			or Polytheisms, or to what other class, may
			in the present state of our intelligence remain undecided
			(<i>schweben</i>). A certain touch of Manicheism, not indeed
			in the Gnostic shape, is discernible enough: also (for
			human Error walks in a cycle, and reappears at intervals)
			a not-inconsiderable resemblance to that Superstition
			of the Athos Monks, who by fasting from all
			nourishment, and looking intensely for a length of time
			into their own navels, came to discern therein the true
			Apocalypse of Nature, and Heaven Unveiled. To my
			own surmise, it appears as if this Dandiacal Sect were
			but a new modification, adapted to the new time, of
			that primeval Superstition, <em>Self-worship</em>; which Zerdusht,
			Quangfoutchee, Mohamed, and others, strove
			rather to subordinate and restrain than to eradicate; and
			which only in the purer forms of Religion has been altogether
			rejected. Wherefore, if any one chooses to name
			it revived Ahrimanism, or a new figure of Demon-Worship,
			I have, so far as is yet visible, no objection.</p>

			<p>&#8216;For the rest, these people, animated with the zeal
			of a new Sect, display courage and perseverance, and
			what force there is in man&#8217;s nature, though never so
			enslaved. They affect great purity and separatism;
			distinguish themselves by a particular costume (whereof
			some notices were given in the earlier part of this
			Volume); likewise, so far as possible, by a particular
			speech (apparently some broken <i>Lingua-franca</i>, or English-French);
			and, on the whole, strive to maintain a
			true Nazarene deportment, and keep themselves unspotted
			from the world.</p>

			<p>&#8216;They have their Temples, whereof the chief, as the
			Jewish Temple did, stands in their metropolis; and is
			named <i>Almack&#8217;s</i>, a word of uncertain etymology. They
			worship principally by night; and have their Highpriests
			and Highpriestesses, who, however, do not continue for
			life. The rites, by some supposed to be of the Menadic
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page208" name="page208"></a>208</span>sort, or perhaps with an Eleusinian or Cabiric character,
			are held strictly secret. Nor are Sacred Books wanting
			to the Sect; these they call <em>Fashionable Novels</em>: however,
			the Canon is not completed, and some are canonical
			and others not.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Of such Sacred Books I, not without expense, procured
			myself some samples; and in hope of true insight,
			and with the zeal which beseems an Inquirer into
			Clothes, set to interpret and study them. But wholly
			to no purpose: that tough faculty of reading, for which
			the world will not refuse me credit, was here for the first
			time foiled and set at naught. In vain that I summoned
			my whole energies (<i>mich weidlich anstrengte</i>), and did
			my very utmost; at the end of some short space, I was
			uniformly seized with not so much what I can call a
			drumming in my ears, as a kind of infinite, unsufferable,
			Jews-harping and scrannel-piping there; to which the
			frightfullest species of Magnetic Sleep soon supervened.
			And if I strove to shake this away, and absolutely would
			not yield, there came a hitherto unfelt sensation, as of
			<i>Delirium Tremens</i>, and a melting into total deliquium:
			till at last, by order of the Doctor, dreading ruin to my
			whole intellectual and bodily faculties, and a general
			breaking-up of the constitution, I reluctantly but determinedly
			forbore. Was there some miracle at work
			here; like those Fire-balls, and supernal and infernal
			prodigies, which, in the case of the Jewish Mysteries,
			have also more than once scared-back the Alien? Be
			this as it may, such failure on my part, after best efforts,
			must excuse the imperfection of this sketch; altogether
			incomplete, yet the completest I could give of a Sect
			too singular to be omitted.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Loving my own life and senses as I do, no power
			shall induce me, as a private individual, to open another
			<em>Fashionable Novel</em>. But luckily, in this dilemma, comes
			a hand from the clouds; whereby if not victory, deliverance
			is held out to me. Round one of those Book-packages,
			which the <i>Stillschweigen&#8217;sche Buchhandlung</i>
			is in the habit of importing from England, come, as is
			usual, various waste printed-sheets (<i>Maculatur blätter</i>),
			by way of interior wrappage: into these the Clothes-Philosopher,
			with a certain Mohamedan reverence even
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page209" name="page209"></a>209</span>for waste-paper, where curious knowledge will sometimes
			hover, disdains not to cast his eye. Readers may
			judge of his astonishment when on such a defaced stray-sheet,
			probably the outcast fraction of some English
			Periodical, such as they name <i>Magazine</i>, appears something
			like a Dissertation on this very subject of <i>Fashionable
			Novels</i>! It sets out, indeed, chiefly from a Secular
			point of view; directing itself, not without asperity,
			against some to me unknown individual named <i>Pelham</i>,
			who seems to be a Mystagogue, and leading Teacher
			and Preacher of the Sect; so that, what indeed otherwise
			was not to be expected in such a fugitive fragmentary
			sheet, the true secret, the Religious physiognomy
			and physiology of the Dandiacal Body, is nowise laid
			fully open there. Nevertheless, scattered lights do from
			time to time sparkle out, whereby I have endeavoured
			to profit. Nay, in one passage selected from the Prophecies,
			or Mythic Theogonies, or whatever they are
			(for the style seems very mixed) of this Mystagogue, I
			find what appears to be a Confession of Faith, or Whole
			Duty of Man, according to the tenets of that Sect.
			Which Confession or Whole Duty, therefore, as proceeding
			from a source so authentic, I shall here arrange
			under Seven distinct Articles, and in very abridged shape
			lay before the German world; therewith taking leave of
			this matter. Observe also, that to avoid possibility of
			error, I, as far as may be, quote literally from the
			Original:</p>

			<p class="headline">&#8216;Articles of Faith.</p>

			<p>&#8216;&#8220;1. Coats should have nothing of the triangle about
			them; at the same time, wrinkles behind should be
			carefully avoided.</p>

			<p>&#8216;&#8220;2. The collar is a very important point: it should
			be low behind, and slightly rolled.</p>

			<p>&#8216;&#8220;3. No license of fashion can allow a man of
			delicate taste to adopt the posterial luxuriance of a
			Hottentot.</p>

			<p>&#8216;&#8220;4. There is safety in a swallow-tail.</p>

			<p>&#8216;&#8220;5. The good sense of a gentleman is nowhere
			more finely developed than in his rings.</p>

			<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page210" name="page210"></a>210</span>&#8216;&#8220;6. It is permitted to mankind, under certain
			restrictions, to wear white waistcoats.</p>

			<p>&#8216;&#8220;7. The trousers must be exceedingly tight across
			the hips.&#8221;</p>

			<p>&#8216;All which Propositions I, for the present, content
			myself with modestly but peremptorily and irrevocably
			denying.</p>

			<p>&#8216;In strange contrast with this Dandiacal Body stands
			another British Sect, originally, as I understand, of
			Ireland, where its chief seat still is; but known also
			in the main Island, and indeed everywhere rapidly
			spreading. As this Sect has hitherto emitted no Canonical
			Books, it remains to me in the same state of
			obscurity as the Dandiacal, which has published Books
			that the unassisted human faculties are inadequate to
			read. The members appear to be designated by a considerable
			diversity of names, according to their various
			places of establishment: in England they are generally
			called the <i>Drudge</i> Sect; also, unphilosophically enough,
			the <i>White Negroes</i>; and, chiefly in scorn by those of
			other communions, the <i>Ragged-Beggar</i> Sect. In Scotland,
			again, I find them entitled <i>Hallanshakers</i>, or the
			<i>Stook of Duds</i> Sect; any individual communicant is
			named <i>Stook of Duds</i> (that is, Shock of Rags), in allusion,
			doubtless, to their professional Costume. While
			in Ireland, which, as mentioned, is their grand parent
			hive, they go by a perplexing multiplicity of designations,
			such as <i>Bogtrotters</i>, <i>Redshanks</i>, <i>Ribbonmen</i>,
			<i>Cottiers</i>, <i>Peep-of-Day Boys</i>, <i>Babes of the Wood</i>, <i>Rockites</i>,
			<i>Poor-Slaves</i>; which last, however, seems to be the
			primary and generic name; whereto, probably enough,
			the others are only subsidiary species, or slight varieties;
			or, at most, propagated offsets from the parent
			stem, whose minute subdivisions, and shades of difference,
			it were here loss of time to dwell on. Enough for
			us to understand, what seems indubitable, that the
			original Sect is that of the <i>Poor-Slaves</i>; whose doctrines,
			practices, and fundamental characteristics
			pervade and animate the whole Body, howsoever denominated
			or outwardly diversified.</p>

			<p>&#8216;The precise speculative tenets of this Brotherhood:
			how the Universe, and Man, and Man&#8217;s Life, picture
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page211" name="page211"></a>211</span>themselves to the mind of an Irish Poor-Slave; with
			what feelings and opinions he looks forward on the
			Future, round on the Present, back on the Past, it were
			extremely difficult to specify. Something Monastic
			there appears to be in their Constitution: we find them
			bound by the two Monastic Vows, of Poverty and
			Obedience; which Vows, especially the former, it is
			said, they observe with great strictness; nay, as I have
			understood it, they are pledged, and be it by any solemn
			Nazarene ordination or not, irrevocably consecrated
			thereto, even <em>before</em> birth. That the third Monastic
			Vow, of Chastity, is rigidly enforced among them, I
			find no ground to conjecture.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Furthermore, they appear to imitate the Dandiacal
			Sect in their grand principle of wearing a peculiar Costume.
			Of which Irish Poor-Slave Costume no description
			will indeed be found in the present Volume; for
			this reason, that by the imperfect organ of Language it
			did not seem describable. Their raiment consists of
			innumerable skirts, lappets and irregular wings, of all
			cloths and of all colours; through the labyrinthic intricacies
			of which their bodies are introduced by some
			unknown process. It is fastened together by a multiplex
			combination of buttons, thrums and skewers; to which
			frequently is added a girdle of leather, of hempen or
			even of straw rope, round the loins. To straw rope,
			indeed, they seem partial, and often wear it by way of
			sandals. In head-dress they affect a certain freedom:
			hats with partial brim, without crown, or with only a
			loose, hinged, or valve crown; in the former case, they
			sometimes invert the hat, and wear it brim uppermost,
			like a University-cap, with what view is unknown.</p>

			<p>&#8216;The name Poor-Slaves seems to indicate a Slavonic,
			Polish, or Russian origin: not so, however, the interior
			essence and spirit of their Superstition, which rather
			displays a Teutonic or Druidical character. One might
			fancy them worshippers of Hertha, or the Earth: for
			they dig and affectionately work continually in her
			bosom; or else, shut-up in private Oratories, meditate
			and manipulate the substances derived from her; seldom
			looking-up towards the Heavenly Luminaries, and then
			with comparative indifference. Like the Druids, on the
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page212" name="page212"></a>212</span>other hand, they live in dark dwellings; often even
			breaking their glass-windows, where they find such, and
			stuffing them up with pieces of raiment, or other opaque
			substances, till the fit obscurity is restored. Again, like
			all followers of Nature-Worship, they are liable to outbreakings
			of an enthusiasm rising to ferocity; and burn
			men, if not in wicker idols, yet in sod cottages.</p>

			<p>&#8216;In respect of diet, they have also their observances.
			All Poor-Slaves are Rhizophagous (or Root-eaters); a
			few are Ichthyophagous, and use Salted Herrings:
			other animal food they abstain from; except indeed,
			with perhaps some strange inverted fragment of a
			Brahminical feeling, such animals as die a natural death.
			Their universal sustenance is the root named Potato,
			cooked by fire alone; and generally without condiment
			or relish of any kind, save an unknown condiment
			named <i>Point</i>, into the meaning of which I have vainly
			inquired; the victual <i>Potatoes-and-Point</i> not appearing,
			at least not with specific accuracy of description, in any
			European Cookery-Book whatever. For drink, they
			use, with an almost epigrammatic counterpoise of taste,
			Milk, which is the mildest of liquors, and <i>Potheen</i>, which
			is the fiercest. This latter I have tasted, as well as
			the English <i>Blue-Ruin</i>, and the Scotch <i>Whisky</i>, analogous
			fluids used by the Sect in those countries: it
			evidently contains some form of alcohol, in the highest
			state of concentration, though disguised with acrid oils;
			and is, on the whole, the most pungent substance known
			to me,&#8212;indeed, a perfect liquid fire. In all their Religious
			Solemnities, Potheen is said to be an indispensable
			requisite, and largely consumed.</p>

			<p>&#8216;An Irish Traveller, of perhaps common veracity,
			who presents himself under the to me unmeaning title
			of <i>The late John Bernard</i>, offers the following sketch
			of a domestic establishment, the inmates whereof,
			though such is not stated expressly, appear to have been
			of that Faith. Thereby shall my German readers now
			behold an Irish Poor-Slave, as it were with their own
			eyes; and even see him at meat. Moreover, in the so-precious
			waste-paper sheet above mentioned, I have
			found some corresponding picture of a Dandiacal Household,
			painted by that same Dandiacal Mystagogue, or
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page213" name="page213"></a>213</span>Theogonist: this also, by way of counterpart and contrast,
			the world shall look into.</p>

			<p>&#8216;First, therefore, of the Poor-Slave, who appears
			likewise to have been a species of Innkeeper. I quote
			from the original:</p>

			<p class="headline_style_2">Poor-Slave Household</p>


			<p>&#8216;&#8220;The furniture of this Caravansera consisted of a
			large iron Pot, two oaken Tables, two Benches, two
			Chairs, and a Potheen Noggin. There was a Loft
			above (attainable by a ladder), upon which the inmates
			slept; and the space below was divided by a hurdle into
			two Apartments; the one for their cow and pig, the
			other for themselves and guests. On entering the house
			we discovered the family, eleven in number, at dinner:
			the father sitting at the top, the mother at the bottom,
			the children on each side, of a large oaken Board, which
			was scooped-out in the middle, like a trough, to receive
			the contents of their Pot of Potatoes. Little holes were
			cut at equal distances to contain Salt; and a bowl of
			Milk stood on the table: all the luxuries of meat and
			beer, bread, knives and dishes were dispensed with.&#8221;
			The Poor-Slave himself our Traveller found, as he
			says, broad-backed, black-browed, of great personal
			strength, and mouth from ear to ear. His Wife was
			a sun-browned but well-featured woman; and his
			young ones, bare and chubby, had the appetite of
			ravens. Of their Philosophical or Religious tenets or
			observances, no notice or hint.</p>

			<p>&#8216;But now, secondly, of the Dandiacal Household;
			in which, truly, that often-mentioned Mystagogue and
			inspired Penman himself has his abode:</p>


			<p class="headline_style_2">Dandiacal Household</p>

			<p>&#8216;&#8220;A Dressing-room splendidly furnished; violet-coloured
			curtains, chairs and ottomans of the same hue.
			Two full-length Mirrors are placed, one on each side
			of a table, which supports the luxuries of the Toilet.
			Several Bottles of Perfumes, arranged in a peculiar
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page214" name="page214"></a>214</span>fashion, stand upon a smaller table of mother-of-pearl:
			opposite to these are placed the appurtenances of Lavation
			richly wrought in frosted silver. A wardrobe of
			Buhl is on the left; the doors of which, being partly
			open, discover a profusion of Clothes; Shoes of a singularly
			small size monopolise the lower shelves. Fronting
			the wardrobe a door ajar gives some slight glimpse
			of a Bathroom. Folding-doors in the background.&#8212;Enter
			the Author,&#8221; our Theogonist in person, &#8220;obsequiously
			preceded by a French Valet, in white silk Jacket
			and cambric Apron.&#8221;</p>

			<p class="post_thoughtbreak">&#8216;Such are the two Sects which, at this moment,
			divide the more unsettled portion of the British People;
			and agitate that ever-vexed country. To the eye of
			the political Seer, their mutual relation, pregnant with
			the elements of discord and hostility, is far from consoling.
			These two principals of Dandiacal Self-worship
			or Demon-worship, and Poor-Slavish or Drudgical
			Earth-worship, or whatever that same Drudgism may
			be, do as yet indeed manifest themselves under distant
			and nowise considerable shapes: nevertheless, in their
			roots and subterranean ramifications, they extend
			through the entire structure of Society, and work unweariedly
			in the secret depths of English national Existence;
			striving to separate and isolate it into two
			contradictory, uncommunicating masses.</p>

			<p>&#8216;In numbers, and even individual strength, the
			Poor-Slaves or Drudges, it would seem, are hourly
			increasing. The Dandiacal, again, is by nature no
			proselytising Sect; but it boasts of great hereditary
			resources, and is strong by union; whereas the Drudges,
			split into parties, have as yet no rallying-point; or at
			best only co-operate by means of partial secret affiliations.
			If, indeed, there were to arise a <i>Communion of
			Drudges</i>, as there is already a Communion of Saints,
			what strangest effects would follow therefrom! Dandyism
			as yet affects to look-down on Drudgism: but
			perhaps the hour of trial, when it will be practically
			seen which ought to look down, and which up, is not
			so distant.</p>

			<p>&#8216;To me it seems probable that the two Sects will one
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page215" name="page215"></a>215</span>day part England between them; each recruiting itself
			from the intermediate ranks, till there be none left to
			enlist on either side. Those Dandiacal Manicheans,
			with the host of Dandyising Christians, will form one
			body: the Drudges, gathering round them whosoever
			is Drudgical, be he Christian or Infidel Pagan; sweeping-up
			likewise all manner of Utilitarians, Radicals,
			refractory Potwallopers, and so forth, into their general
			mass, will form another. I could liken Dandyism and
			Drudgism to two bottomless boiling Whirlpools that
			had broken-out on opposite quarters of the firm land:
			as yet they appear only disquieted, foolishly bubbling
			wells, which man&#8217;s art might cover-in; yet mark them,
			their diameter is daily widening: they are hollow Cones
			that boil-up from the infinite Deep, over which your
			firm land is but a thin crust or rind! Thus daily is the
			intermediate land crumbling-in, daily the empire of the
			two Buchan-Bullers extending; till now there is but a
			foot-plank, a mere film of Land between them; this too
			is washed away: and then&#8212;we have the true Hell of
			Waters, and Noah&#8217;s Deluge is outdeluged!</p>

			<p>&#8216;Or better, I might call them two boundless, and
			indeed unexampled Electric Machines (turned by the
			&#8220;Machinery of Society&#8221;), with batteries of opposite
			quality; Drudgism the Negative, Dandyism the Positive:
			one attracts hourly towards it and appropriates
			all the Positive Electricity of the nation (namely, the
			Money thereof); the other is equally busy with the
			Negative (that is to say the Hunger), which is equally
			potent. Hitherto you see only partial transient sparkles
			and sputters: but wait a little, till the entire nation
			is in an electric state; till your whole vital Electricity,
			no longer healthfully Neutral, is cut into two isolated
			portions of Positive and Negative (of Money and of
			Hunger); and stands there bottled-up in two World-Batteries!
			The stirring of a child&#8217;s finger brings the
			two together; and then&#8212;What then? The Earth is
			but shivered into impalpable smoke by that Doom&#8217;s-thunderpeal;
			the Sun misses one of his Planets in
			Space, and thenceforth there are no eclipses of the
			Moon.&#8212;Or better still, I might liken&#8217;&#8212;</p>

			<p>Oh! enough, enough of likenings and similitudes;
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page216" name="page216"></a>216</span>in excess of which, truly, it is hard to say whether
			Teufelsdröckh or ourselves sin the more.</p>

			<p>We have often blamed him for a habit of wire-drawing
			and over-refining; from of old we have
			been familiar with his tendency to Mysticism and
			Religiosity, whereby in everything he was still scenting-out
			Religion: but never perhaps did these amaurosis-suffusions
			so cloud and distort his otherwise
			most piercing vision, as in this of the <i>Dandiacal Body</i>!
			Or was there something of intended satire; is the Professor
			and Seer not quite the blinkard he affects to be?
			Of an ordinary mortal we should have decisively answered
			in the affirmative; but with a Teufelsdröckh
			there ever hovers some shade of doubt. In the mean
			while, if satire were actually intended, the case is little
			better. There are not wanting men who will answer:
			Does your Professor take us for simpletons? His irony
			has overshot itself; we see through it, and perhaps
			through him.</p>

		</div>
		<div id="book_3_chapter_11" class="chapter">
			<p class="chapter_head">CHAPTER XI</p>

			<h3 class="chapter_title">TAILORS</h3>

			<p><span class="first_word">Thus</span>, however, has our first Practical Inference from
			the Clothes-Philosophy, that which respects Dandies,
			been sufficiently drawn; and we come now to the second,
			concerning Tailors. On this latter our opinion happily
			quite coincides with that of Teufelsdröckh himself, as
			expressed in the concluding page of his Volume, to
			whom, therefore, we willingly give place. Let him
			speak his own last words, in his own way:</p>

			<p class="post_thoughtbreak">&#8216;Upwards of a century,&#8217; says he, &#8216;must elapse,
			and still the bleeding fight of Freedom be fought, whoso
			is noblest perishing in the van, and thrones be hurled
			on altars like Pelion on Ossa, and the Moloch of Iniquity
			have his victims, and the Michael of Justice his
			martyrs, before Tailors can be admitted to their true prerogatives
			of manhood, and this last wound of suffering
			Humanity be closed.</p>

			<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page217" name="page217"></a>217</span>&#8216;If aught in the history of the world&#8217;s blindness could
			surprise us, here might we indeed pause and wonder. An
			idea has gone abroad, and fixed itself down into a wide-spreading
			rooted error, that Tailors are a distinct species
			in Physiology, not Men, but fractional Parts of a Man.
			Call any one a <i>Schneider</i> (Cutter, Tailor), is it not, in
			our dislocated, hood-winked, and indeed delirious condition
			of Society, equivalent to defying his perpetual
			fellest enmity? The epithet <i>schneider-mässig</i> (tailor-like)
			betokens an otherwise unapproachable degree of
			pusillanimity: we introduce a <i>Tailor&#8217;s-Melancholy</i>, more
			opprobrious than any Leprosy, into our Books of Medicine;
			and fable I know not what of his generating it
			by living on Cabbage. Why should I speak of Hans
			Sachs (himself a Shoemaker, or kind of Leather-Tailor),
			with his <i>Schneider mit dem Panier</i>? Why of Shakspeare,
			in his <i>Taming of the Shrew</i>, and elsewhere?
			Does it not stand on record that the English Queen
			Elizabeth, receiving a deputation of Eighteen Tailors,
			addressed them with a &#8220;Good morning, gentlemen
			both!&#8221; Did not the same virago boast that she had a
			Cavalry Regiment, whereof neither horse nor man could
			be injured; her Regiment, namely, of Tailors on Mares?
			Thus everywhere is the falsehood taken for granted, and
			acted-on as an indisputable fact.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Nevertheless, need I put the question to any Physiologist,
			whether it is disputable or not? Seems it not
			at least presumable, that, under his Clothes, the Tailor
			has bones and viscera, and other muscles than the
			sartorious? Which function of manhood is the Tailor
			not conjectured to perform? Can he not arrest for
			debt? Is he not in most countries a tax-paying animal?</p>

			<p>&#8216;To no reader of this Volume can it be doubtful which
			conviction is mine. Nay if the fruit of these long vigils,
			and almost preternatural Inquiries, is not to perish
			utterly, the world will have approximated towards a
			higher Truth; and the doctrine, which Swift, with the
			keen forecast of genius, dimly anticipated, will stand
			revealed in clear light: that the Tailor is not only a
			Man, but something of a Creator or Divinity. Of
			Franklin it was said, that &#8220;he snatched the Thunder
			from Heaven and the Sceptre from Kings&#8221;: but which
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page218" name="page218"></a>218</span>is greater, I would ask, he that lends, or he that
			snatches? For, looking away from individual cases,
			and how a Man is by the Tailor new-created into a
			Nobleman, and clothed not only with Wool but with
			Dignity and a Mystic Dominion,&#8212;is not the fair fabric
			of Society itself, with all its royal mantles and pontifical
			stoles, whereby, from nakedness and dismemberment,
			we are organised into Polities, into nations, and a whole
			co-operating Mankind, the creation, as has here been
			often irrefragably evinced, of the Tailor alone?&#8212;What
			too are all Poets and moral Teachers, but a species of
			Metaphorical Tailors? Touching which high Guild the
			greatest living Guild-brother has triumphantly asked us:
			&#8220;Nay if thou wilt have it, who but the Poet first made
			Gods for men; brought them down to us; and raised
			us up to them?&#8221;</p>

			<p>&#8216;And this is he, whom sitting downcast, on the hard
			basis of his Shopboard, the world treats with contumely,
			as the ninth part of a man! Look up, thou
			much-injured one, look up with the kindling eye of
			hope, and prophetic bodings of a noble better time.
			Too long hast thou sat there, on crossed legs, wearing
			thy ankle-joints to horn; like some sacred Anchorite,
			or Catholic Fakir, doing penance, drawing down
			Heaven&#8217;s richest blessings, for a world that scoffed at
			thee. Be of hope! Already streaks of blue peer
			through our clouds; the thick gloom of Ignorance is
			rolling asunder, and it will be Day. Mankind will
			repay with interest their long-accumulated debt: the
			Anchorite that was scoffed at will be worshipped; the
			Fraction will become not an Integer only, but a Square
			and Cube. With astonishment the world will recognise
			that the Tailor is its Hierophant and Hierarch, or
			even its God.</p>

			<p>&#8216;As I stood in the Mosque of St. Sophia, and looked
			upon these Four-and-Twenty Tailors, sewing and embroidering
			that rich Cloth, which the Sultan sends
			yearly for the Caaba of Mecca, I thought within myself:
			How many other Unholies has your covering Art
			made holy, besides this Arabian Whinstone!</p>

			<p>&#8216;Still more touching was it when, turning the corner
			of a lane, in the Scottish Town of Edinburgh, I came
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page219" name="page219"></a>219</span>upon a Signpost, whereon stood written that such and
			such a one was &#8220;Breeches-Maker to his Majesty&#8221;;
			and stood painted the Effigies of a Pair of Leather
			Breeches, and between the knees these memorable
			words, <span class="special_emphasis">Sic itur ad astra</span>. Was not this the martyr
			prison-speech of a Tailor sighing indeed in bonds, yet
			sighing towards deliverance, and prophetically appealing
			to a better day? A day of justice, when the worth
			of Breeches would be revealed to man, and the Scissors
			become forever venerable.</p>

			<p>&#8216;Neither, perhaps, may I now say, has his appeal
			been altogether in vain. It was in this high moment,
			when the soul, rent, as it were, and shed asunder, is
			open to inspiring influence, that I first conceived this
			Work on Clothes: the greatest I can ever hope to do;
			which has already, after long retardations, occupied,
			and will yet occupy, so large a section of my Life; and
			of which the Primary and simpler Portion may here find
			its conclusion.&#8217;</p>

		</div>
		<div id="book_3_chapter_12" class="chapter">
			<p class="chapter_head">CHAPTER XII</p>

			<h3 class="chapter_title">FAREWELL</h3>

			<p><span class="first_word">So</span> have we endeavoured, from the enormous, amorphous
			Plum-pudding, more like a Scottish Haggis,
			which Herr Teufelsdröckh had kneaded for his fellow
			mortals, to pick-out the choicest Plums, and present
			them separately on a cover of our own. A laborious,
			perhaps a thankless enterprise; in which, however,
			something of hope has occasionally cheered us, and
			of which we can now wash our hands not altogether
			without satisfaction. If hereby, though in barbaric
			wise, some morsel of spiritual nourishment have been
			added to the scanty ration of our beloved British world,
			what nobler recompense could the Editor desire? If
			it prove otherwise, why should he murmur? Was not
			this a Task which Destiny, in any case, had appointed
			him; which having now done with, he sees his general
			Day&#8217;s-work so much the lighter, so much the shorter?</p>

			<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page220" name="page220"></a>220</span>Of Professor Teufelsdröckh it seems impossible to
			take leave without a mingled feeling of astonishment,
			gratitude and disapproval. Who will not regret that
			talents, which might have profited in the higher walks
			of Philosophy, or in Art itself, have been so much
			devoted to a rummaging among lumber-rooms; nay
			too often to a scraping in kennels, where lost rings and
			diamond-necklaces are nowise the sole conquests?
			Regret is unavoidable; yet censure were loss of time.
			To cure him of his mad humours British Criticism would
			essay in vain: enough for her if she can, by vigilance,
			prevent the spreading of such among ourselves. What
			a result, should this piebald, entangled, hyper-metaphorical
			style of writing, not to say of thinking, become
			general among our Literary men! As it might so easily
			do. Thus has not the Editor himself, working over
			Teufelsdröckh&#8217;s German, lost much of his own English
			purity? Even as the smaller whirlpool is sucked into
			the larger, and made to whirl along with it, so has the
			lesser mind, in this instance, been forced to become
			portion of the greater, and like it, see all things figuratively:
			which habit time and assiduous effort will be
			needed to eradicate.</p>

			<p>Nevertheless, wayward as our Professor shows himself,
			is there any reader that can part with him in
			declared enmity? Let us confess, there is that in the
			wild, much-suffering, much-inflicting man, which almost
			attaches us. His attitude, we will hope and believe, is
			that of a man who had said to Cant, Begone; and to
			Dilettantism, Here thou canst not be; and to Truth,
			Be thou in place of all to me: a man who had manfully
			defied the &#8216;Time-prince,&#8217; or Devil, to his face; nay
			perhaps, Hannibal-like, was mysteriously consecrated
			from birth to that warfare, and now stood minded to
			wage the same, by all weapons, in all places, at all
			times. In such a cause, any soldier, were he but a
			Polack Scythe-man, shall be welcome.</p>

			<p>Still the question returns on us: How could a man
			occasionally of keen insight, not without keen sense of
			propriety, who had real Thoughts to communicate,
			resolve to emit them in a shape bordering so closely
			on the absurd? Which question he were wiser than
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page221" name="page221"></a>221</span>the present Editor who should satisfactorily answer.
			Our conjecture has sometimes been, that perhaps
			Necessity as well as Choice was concerned in it.
			Seems it not conceivable that, in a Life like our Professor&#8217;s,
			where so much bountifully given by Nature
			had in Practice failed and misgone, Literature also
			would never rightly prosper: that striving with his
			characteristic vehemence to paint this and the other
			Picture, and ever without success, he at last desperately
			dashes his sponge, full of all colours, against the canvas,
			to try whether it will paint Foam? With all his
			stillness, there were perhaps in Teufelsdröckh desperation
			enough for this.</p>

			<p>A second conjecture we hazard with even less
			warranty. It is, that Teufelsdröckh is not without
			some touch of the universal feeling, a wish to proselytise.
			How often already have we paused, uncertain
			whether the basis of this so enigmatic nature were really
			Stoicism and Despair, or Love and Hope only seared
			into the figure of these! Remarkable, moreover, is
			this saying of his: &#8216;How were Friendship possible?
			In mutual devotedness to the Good and True: otherwise
			impossible; except as Armed Neutrality, or hollow
			Commercial League. A man, be the Heavens ever
			praised, is sufficient for himself; yet were ten men,
			united in Love, capable of being and of doing what ten
			thousand singly would fail in. Infinite is the help man
			can yield to man.&#8217; And now in conjunction therewith
			consider this other: &#8216;It is the Night of the World,
			and still long till it be Day: we wander amid the
			glimmer of smoking ruins, and the Sun and the Stars
			of Heaven are as if blotted out for a season; and two
			immeasurable Phantoms, <span class="special_emphasis">Hypocrisy</span> and <span class="special_emphasis">Atheism</span>, with
			the Gowl, <span class="special_emphasis">Sensuality</span>, stalk abroad over the Earth, and
			call it theirs: well at ease are the Sleepers for whom
			Existence is a shallow Dream.&#8217;</p>

			<p>But what of the awestruck Wakeful who find it a
			Reality? Should not these unite; since even an
			authentic Spectre is not visible to Two?&#8212;In which case
			were this enormous Clothes-Volume properly an enormous
			Pitchpan, which our Teufelsdröckh in his lone
			watch-tower had kindled, that it might flame far and
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page222" name="page222"></a>222</span>wide through the Night, and many a disconsolately
			wandering spirit be guided thither to a Brother&#8217;s
			bosom!&#8212;We say as before, with all his malign Indifference,
			who knows what mad Hopes this man may
			harbour?</p>

			<p>Meanwhile there is one fact to be stated here, which
			harmonises ill with such conjecture; and, indeed, were
			Teufelsdröckh made like other men, might as good as
			altogether subvert it. Namely, that while the Beacon-fire
			blazed its brightest, the Watchman had quitted it;
			that no pilgrim could now ask him: Watchman, what
			of the Night? Professor Teufelsdröckh, be it known
			is no longer visibly present at Weissnichtwo, but again
			to all appearance lost in space! Some time ago, the
			Hofrath Heuschrecke was pleased to favour us with
			another copious Epistle; wherein much is said about
			the &#8216;Population-Institute&#8217;; much repeated in praise
			of the Paper-bag Documents, the hieroglyphic nature
			of which our Hofrath still seems not to have surmised;
			and, lastly, the strangest occurrence communicated, to
			us for the first time, in the following paragraph:</p>

			<p>&#8216;<i>Ew. Wohlgeboren</i> will have seen from the public
			Prints, with what affectionate and hitherto fruitless
			solicitude Weissnichtwo regards the disappearance of
			her Sage. Might but the united voice of Germany
			prevail on him to return; nay, could we but so much
			as elucidate for ourselves by what mystery he went
			away! But, alas, old Lieschen experiences or affects
			the profoundest deafness, the profoundest ignorance:
			in the Wahngasse all lies swept, silent, sealed up; the
			Privy Council itself can hitherto elicit no answer.</p>

			<p>&#8216;It had been remarked that while the agitating news
			of those Parisian Three Days flew from mouth to mouth,
			and dinned every ear in Weissnichtwo, Herr Teufelsdröckh
			was not known, at the <i>Gans</i> or elsewhere, to
			have spoken, for a whole week, any syllable except
			once these three: <i>Es geht an</i> (It is beginning). Shortly
			after, as <i>Ew. Wohlgeboren</i> knows, was the public tranquillity
			here, as in Berlin, threatened by a Sedition of
			the Tailors. Nor did there want Evil-wishers, or perhaps
			mere desperate Alarmists, who asserted that the
			closing Chapter of the Clothes-Volume was to blame.
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page223" name="page223"></a>223</span>In this appalling crisis, the serenity of our Philosopher
			was indescribable; nay, perhaps through one humble
			individual, something thereof might pass into the <i>Rath</i>
			(Council) itself, and so contribute to the country&#8217;s deliverance.
			The Tailors are now entirely pacificated.&#8212;</p>

			<p>&#8216;To neither of these two incidents can I attribute
			our loss: yet still comes there the shadow of a suspicion
			out of Paris and its Politics. For example, when
			the <i>Saint-Simonian Society</i> transmitted its Propositions
			hither, and the whole <i>Gans</i> was one vast cackle of
			laughter, lamentation and astonishment, our Sage sat
			mute; and at the end of the third evening said merely:
			&#8220;Here also are men who have discovered, not without
			amazement, that Man is still Man; of which high, long-forgotten
			Truth you already see them make a false
			application.&#8221; Since then, as has been ascertained by
			examination of the Post-Director, there passed at least
			one Letter with its Answer between the Messieurs
			Bazard-Enfantin and our Professor himself; of what
			tenor can now only be conjectured. On the fifth night
			following, he was seen for the last time!</p>

			<p>&#8216;Has this invaluable man, so obnoxious to most of
			the hostile Sects that convulse our Era, been spirited
			away by certain of their emissaries; or did he go forth
			voluntarily to their head-quarters to confer with them
			and confront them? Reason we have, at least of a
			negative sort, to believe the Lost still living; our
			widowed heart also whispers that ere long he will himself
			give a sign. Otherwise, indeed, his archives must,
			one day, be opened by Authority; where much, perhaps
			the <i>Palingenesie</i> itself, is thought to be reposited.&#8217;</p>


			<p class="post_thoughtbreak">Thus far the Hofrath; who vanishes, as is his wont,
			too like an Ignis Fatuus, leaving the dark still darker.</p>

			<p>So that Teufelsdröckh&#8217;s public History were not
			done, then, or reduced to an even, unromantic tenor;
			nay, perhaps the better part thereof were only beginning?
			We stand in a region of conjectures, where
			substance has melted into shadow, and one cannot be
			distinguished from the other. May Time, which solves
			or suppresses all problems, throw glad light on this
			also! Our own private conjecture, now amounting
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page224" name="page224"></a>224</span>almost to certainty, is that, safe-moored in some stillest
			obscurity, not to lie always still, Teufelsdröckh is
			actually in London!</p>

			<p>Here, however, can the present Editor, with an ambrosial
			joy as of over-weariness falling into sleep, lay
			down his pen. Well does he know, if human testimony
			be worth aught, that to innumerable British readers
			likewise, this is a satisfying consummation; that innumerable
			British readers consider him, during these
			current months, but as an uneasy interruption to their
			ways of thought and digestion; and indicate so much,
			not without a certain irritancy and even spoken invective.
			For which, as for other mercies, ought not he
			to thank the Upper Powers? To one and all of you,
			O irritated readers, he, with outstretched arms and
			open heart, will wave a kind farewell. Thou too,
			miraculous Entity, who namest thyself <span class="special_emphasis">Yorke</span> and
			<span class="special_emphasis">Oliver</span>, and with thy vivacities and genialities, with thy
			all-too Irish mirth and madness, and odour of palled
			punch, makest such strange work, farewell; long as
			thou canst, fare-<em>well!</em> Have we not, in the course of
			Eternity, travelled some months of our Life-journey in
			partial sight of one another; have we not existed
			together, though in a state of quarrel?</p>

		</div>

	</div>
	<div id="appendix" class="section">
		<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page225" name="page225"></a>225</span></p>
		<h2 class="section_title">APPENDIX</h2>
		<p class="section_head">TESTIMONIES OF AUTHORS</p>
		<blockquote>
			<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page226" name="page226"></a>226</span>
			This questionable little Book was undoubtedly written among the
			mountain solitudes, in 1831; but, owing to impediments natural and
			accidental, could not, for seven years more, appear as a Volume in
			England;&#8212;and had at last to clip itself in pieces, and be content to
			struggle out, bit by bit, in some courageous <i>Magazine</i> that offered.
			Whereby now, to certain idly curious readers, and even to myself till I
			make study, the insignificant but at last irritating question, What its
			real history and chronology are, is, if not insoluble, considerably involved
			in haze.</p>

			<p>To the first English Edition, 1838, which an American, or two
			American had now opened the way for, there was slightingly prefixed,
			under the title &#8216;<i>Testimonies of Authors</i>,&#8217; some straggle of real
			documents, which, now that I find it again, sets the matter into clear
			light and sequence;&#8212;and shall here, for removal of idle stumbling-blocks
			and nugatory guessings from the path of every reader, be
			reprinted as it stood. (<i>Author&#8217;s Note of 1868.</i>)</p>
		</blockquote>

		<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page227" name="page227"></a>227</span></p>

		<h3 class="section_title">TESTIMONIES OF AUTHORS</h3>

		<p class="headline">I. Highest Class, Bookseller&#8217;s Taster</p>

		<p><i>Taster to Bookseller.</i>&#8212;&#8220;The Author of <i>Teufelsdröckh</i> is a person of
		talent; his work displays here and there some felicity of thought and
		expression, considerable fancy and knowledge: but whether or not it
		would take with the public seems doubtful. For a <i>jeu d&#8217;esprit</i> of that
		kind it is too long; it would have suited better as an essay or article than
		as a volume. The Author has no great tact; his wit is frequently
		heavy; and reminds one of the German Baron who took to leaping on
		tables, and answered that he was learning to be lively. <em>Is</em> the work a
		translation?&#8221;</p>

		<p><i>Bookseller to Editor.</i>&#8212;&#8220;Allow me to say that such a writer requires
		only a little more tact to produce a popular as well as an able work.
		Directly on receiving your permission, I sent your <i>MS.</i> to a gentleman
		in the highest class of men of letters, and an accomplished German
		scholar: I now inclose you his opinion, which, you may rely upon it, is
		a just one; and I have too high an opinion of your good sense to&#8221; &amp;c.
		&amp;c.&#8212;<i>MS.</i> (<i>penes nos</i>), <i>London, 17th September 1831</i>.</p>

		<p class="headline">II. Critic of the Sun</p>

		<p>&#8220;<i>Fraser&#8217;s Magazine</i> exhibits the usual brilliancy, and also the&#8221; &amp;c.
		&#8220;<i>Sartor Resartus</i> is what old Dennis used to call &#8216;a heap of clotted
		nonsense,&#8217; mixed however, here and there, with passages marked by
		thought and striking poetic vigour. But what does the writer mean by
		&#8216;Baphometic fire-baptism&#8217;? Why cannot he lay aside his pedantry,
		and write so as to make himself generally intelligible? We quote by
		way of curiosity a sentence from the <i>Sartor Resartus</i>; which may be
		read either backwards or forwards, for it is equally intelligible either
		way. Indeed, by beginning at the tail, and so working up to the head,
		we think the reader will stand the fairest chance of getting at its
		meaning: &#8216;The fire-baptised soul, long so scathed and thunder-riven,
		here feels its own freedom; which feeling is its Baphometic baptism:
		the citadel of its whole kingdom it has thus gained by assault, and will
		keep inexpugnable; outwards from which the remaining dominions,
		not indeed without hard battering, will doubtless by degrees be
		conquered and pacificated.&#8217; Here is a&#8221;&#8212;&#8230;.&#8212;<i>Sun Newspaper</i>,
		<i>1st April 1834</i>.</p>

		<p class="headline">III. North-American Reviewer</p>

		<p>&#8230; &#8220;After a careful survey of the whole ground, our belief
		is that no such persons as Professor Teufelsdröckh or Counsellor
		Heuschrecke ever existed; that the six Paper-bags, with their China-ink
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page228" name="page228"></a>228</span>inscriptions and multifarious contents, are a mere figment of the
		brain; that the &#8216;present Editor&#8217; is the only person who has ever
		written upon the Philosophy of Clothes; and that the <i>Sartor Resartus</i>
		is the only treatise that has yet appeared upon that subject;&#8212;in short,
		that the whole account of the origin of the work before us, which the
		supposed Editor relates with so much gravity, and of which we have
		given a brief abstract, is, in plain English, a <em>hum</em>.</p>

		<p>&#8220;Without troubling our readers at any great length with our reasons
		for entertaining these suspicions, we may remark, that the absence of
		all other information on the subject, except what is contained in the
		work, is itself a fact of a most significant character. The whole German
		press, as well as the particular one where the work purports to have
		been printed, seems to be under the control of <i>Stillschweigen and Co.</i>,&#8212;Silence
		and Company. If the Clothes-Philosophy and its author
		are making so great a sensation throughout Germany as is pretended,
		how happens it that the only notice we have of the fact is contained in
		a few numbers of a monthly Magazine published at London? How
		happens it that no intelligence about the matter has come out directly
		to this country? We pique ourselves here in New England upon
		knowing at least as much of what is going on in the literary way
		in the old Dutch Mother-land as our brethren of the fast-anchored
		Isle; but thus far we have no tidings whatever of the &#8216;extensive
		close-printed close-meditated volume,&#8217; which forms the subject of
		this pretended commentary. Again, we would respectfully inquire of
		the &#8216;present Editor&#8217; upon what part of the map of Germany we are to
		look for the city of <i>Weissnichtwo</i>,&#8212;&#8216;Know-not-where,&#8217;&#8212;at which
		place the work is supposed to have been printed, and the Author to
		have resided. It has been our fortune to visit several portions of the
		German territory, and to examine pretty carefully, at different times and
		for various purposes, maps of the whole; but we have no recollection
		of any such place. We suspect that the city of <i>Know-not-where</i> might
		be called, with at least as much propriety, <i>Nobody-knows-where</i>, and
		is to be found in the kingdom of <i>Nowhere</i>. Again, the village of
		<i>Entepfuhl</i>&#8212;&#8216;Duck-pond,&#8217; where the supposed Author of the work is
		said to have passed his youth, and that of <i>Hinterschlag</i>, where he had his
		education, are equally foreign to our geography. Duck-ponds enough
		there undoubtedly are in almost every village in Germany, as the
		traveller in that country knows too well to his cost, but any particular
		village denominated Duck-pond is to us altogether <i>terra incognita</i>.
		The names of the personages are not less singular than those of the
		places. Who can refrain from a smile at the yoking together of such a
		pair of appellatives as Diogenes Teufelsdröckh? The supposed bearer
		of this strange title is represented as admitting, in his pretended
		autobiography, that &#8216;he had searched to no purpose through all the
		Heralds&#8217; books in and without the German empire, and through all
		manner of Subscribers&#8217;-lists, Militia-rolls, and other Name-catalogues,&#8217;
		but had nowhere been able to find the &#8216;name Teufelsdröckh, except as
		appended to his own person.&#8217; We can readily believe this, and we
		doubt very much whether any Christian parent would think of condemning
		a son to carry through life the burden of so unpleasant a title.
		That of Counsellor Heuschrecke&#8212;&#8216;Grasshopper,&#8217; though not offensive,
		looks much more like a piece of fancy work than a &#8216;fair business
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page229" name="page229"></a>229</span>transaction.&#8217; The same may be said of <i>Blumine</i>&#8212;&#8216;Flower-Goddess&#8217;&#8212;the
		heroine of the fable; and so of the rest.</p>

		<p>&#8220;In short, our private opinion is, as we have remarked, that the
		whole story of a correspondence with Germany, a university of Nobody-knows-where,
		a Professor of Things in General, a Counsellor Grasshopper,
		a Flower-Goddess Blumine, and so forth, has about as much
		foundation in truth as the late entertaining account of Sir John
		Herschel&#8217;s discoveries in the moon. Fictions of this kind are, however,
		not uncommon, and ought not, perhaps, to be condemned with too
		much severity; but we are not sure that we can exercise the same
		indulgence in regard to the attempt, which seems to be made to mislead
		the public as to the substance of the work before us, and its pretended
		German original. Both purport, as we have seen, to be upon the
		subject of Clothes, or dress. <i>Clothes, their Origin and Influence</i>, is the
		title of the supposed German treatise of Professor Teufelsdröckh, and
		the rather odd name of <i>Sartor Resartus</i>&#8212;the Tailor Patched,&#8212;which
		the present Editor has affixed to his pretended commentary, seems to
		look the same way. But though there is a good deal of remark throughout
		the work in a half-serious, half-comic style upon dress, it seems to
		be in reality a treatise upon the great science of Things in General,
		which Teufelsdröckh is supposed to have professed at the university of
		Nobody-knows-where. Now, without intending to adopt a too rigid
		standard of morals, we own that we doubt a little the propriety of
		offering to the public a treatise on Things in General, under the name
		and in the form of an Essay on Dress. For ourselves, advanced as we
		unfortunately are in the journey of life, far beyond the period when
		dress is practically a matter of interest, we have no hesitation in saying,
		that the real subject of the work is to us more attractive than the
		ostensible one. But this is probably not the case with the mass of
		readers. To the younger portion of the community, which constitutes
		everywhere the very great majority, the subject of dress is one of intense
		and paramount importance. An author who treats it appeals, like the
		poet, to the young men and maidens&#8212;<i>virginibus puerisque</i>,&#8212;and calls
		upon them, by all the motives which habitually operate most strongly
		upon their feelings, to buy his book. When, after opening their purses
		for this purpose, they have carried home the work in triumph, expecting
		to find in it some particular instruction in regard to the tying of their
		neckcloths, or the cut of their corsets, and meet with nothing better
		than a dissertation on Things in General, they will,&#8212;to use the mildest
		term&#8212;not be in very good humour. If the last improvements in legislation,
		which we have made in this country, should have found their way
		to England, the author, we think, would stand some chance of being
		<em>Lynched</em>. Whether his object in this piece of <i>supercherie</i> be merely
		pecuniary profit, or whether he takes a malicious pleasure in quizzing
		the Dandies, we shall not undertake to say. In the latter part of the
		work, he devotes a separate chapter to this class of persons, from the
		tenour of which we should be disposed to conclude, that he would
		consider any mode of divesting them of their property very much in the
		nature of a spoiling of the Egyptians.</p>

		<p>&#8220;The only thing about the work, tending to prove that it is what it
		purports to be, a commentary on a real German treatise, is the style,
		which is a sort of Babylonish dialect, not destitute, it is true, of
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page230" name="page230"></a>230</span>richness, vigour, and at times a sort of singular felicity of expression,
		but very strongly tinged throughout with the peculiar idiom of the
		German language. This quality in the style, however, may be a mere
		result of a great familiarity with German literature, and we cannot,
		therefore, look upon it as in itself decisive, still less as outweighing so
		much evidence of an opposite character.&#8221;&#8212;<i>North-American Review</i>,
		<i>No. 89, October 1835</i>.</p>

		<p class="headline">IV. New England Editors</p>

		<p>&#8220;The Editors have been induced, by the express desire of many
		persons, to collect the following sheets out of the ephemeral pamphlets<span class="footnote_marker">*</span><span class="footnote">* <i>Fraser&#8217;s</i> (London) <i>Magazine</i>, 1833-4.</span>
		in which they first appeared, under the conviction that they contain in
		themselves the assurance of a longer date.</p>

		<p>&#8220;The Editors have no expectation that this little Work will have a
		sudden and general popularity. They will not undertake, as there is
		no need, to justify the gay costume in which the Author delights to
		dress his thoughts, or the German idioms with which he has sportively
		sprinkled his pages. It is his humour to advance the gravest speculations
		upon the gravest topics in a quaint and burlesque style. If his
		masquerade offend any of his audience, to that degree that they will
		not hear what he has to say, it may chance to draw others to listen to
		his wisdom; and what work of imagination can hope to please all?
		But we will venture to remark that the distaste excited by these
		peculiarities in some readers is greatest at first, and is soon forgotten;
		and that the foreign dress and aspect of the Work are quite superficial,
		and cover a genuine Saxon heart. We believe, no book has been
		published for many years, written in a more sincere style of idiomatic
		English, or which discovers an equal mastery over all the riches of the
		language. The Author makes ample amends for the occasional
		eccentricity of his genius, not only by frequent bursts of pure splendour,
		but by the wit and sense which never fail him.</p>

		<p>&#8220;But what will chiefly commend the Book to the discerning reader
		is the manifest design of the work, which is, a Criticism upon the Spirit
		of the Age,&#8212;we had almost said, of the hour,&#8212;in which we live;
		exhibiting in the most just and novel light the present aspects of
		Religion, Politics, Literature, Arts, and Social Life. Under all his
		gaiety the Writer has an earnest meaning, and discovers an insight into
		the manifold wants and tendencies of human nature, which is very rare
		among our popular authors. The philanthropy and the purity of moral
		sentiment, which inspire the work, will find their way to the heart of
		every lover of virtue.&#8221;&#8212;<i>Preface to Sartor Resartus: Boston</i>, 1836, 1837.</p>

		<p class="headline">Sunt, Fuerunt vel Fuere.</p>

		<p><span class="special_emphasis">London</span>, <i>30th June 1838.</i></p>
	</div>
	<div id="summary" class="section">
		<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page231" name="page231"></a>231</span></p>
		<h2 class="section_title">SUMMARY</h2>
		<div id="book_1_summary">
			<h3 class="section_title">BOOK I</h3>
			<p class="headline_style_2"><a href="#book_1_chapter_1" class="special_emphasis">Chap. I.</a> Preliminary</p>

			<p>No Philosophy of Clothes yet, notwithstanding all our Science.
			Strangely forgotten that Man is by nature a <em>naked</em> animal. The
			English mind all-too practically absorbed for any such inquiry. Not
			so, deep-thinking Germany. Advantage of Speculation having free
			course. Editor receives from Professor Teufelsdröckh his new Work
			on Clothes (<a href="#page1">p. 1</a>).</p>

			<p class="headline_style_2"><a href="#book_1_chapter_2" class="special_emphasis">Chap. II.</a> Editorial Difficulties</p>

			<p>How to make known Teufelsdröckh and his Book to English readers;
			especially <em>such</em> a book? Editor receives from the Hofrath Heuschrecke
			a letter promising Biographic Documents. Negotiations with Oliver
			Yorke. <i>Sartor Resartus</i> conceived. Editor&#8217;s assurances and advice
			to his British reader    (<a href="#page5">p. 5</a>).</p>

			<p class="headline_style_2"><a href="#book_1_chapter_3" class="special_emphasis">Chap. III.</a> Reminiscences</p>

			<p>Teufelsdröckh at Weissnichtwo. Professor of Things in General at
			the University there: Outward aspect and character; memorable
			coffee-house utterances; domicile and watch-tower: Sights thence of
			City-life by day and by night; with reflections thereon. Old &#8217;Liza and
			her ways. Character of Hofrath Heuschrecke, and his relation to
			Teufelsdröckh    (<a href="#page9">p. 9</a>).</p>

			<p class="headline_style_2"><a href="#book_1_chapter_4" class="special_emphasis">Chap. IV.</a> Characteristics</p>

			<p>Teufelsdröckh and his Work on Clothes: Strange freedom of speech:
			transcendentalism; force of insight and expression; multifarious
			learning: Style poetic, uncouth: Comprehensiveness of his humour
			and moral feeling. How the Editor once saw him laugh. Different
			kinds of Laughter and their significance    (<a href="#page20">p. 20</a>).</p>

			<p class="headline_style_2"><a href="#book_1_chapter_5" class="special_emphasis">Chap. V.</a> The World in Clothes</p>

			<p>Futile cause-and-effect Philosophies. Teufelsdröckh&#8217;s Orbis
			Vestitus. Clothes first invented for the sake of Ornament. Picture
			of our progenitor, the Aboriginal Savage. Wonders of growth and
			progress in mankind&#8217;s history. Man defined as a Tool-using
			Animal    (<a href="#page25">p. 25</a>).</p>

			<p class="headline_style_2"><a href="#book_1_chapter_6" class="special_emphasis">Chap. VI.</a> Aprons</p>

			<p>Divers Aprons in the world with divers uses. The Military and
			Police Establishment Society&#8217;s working Apron. The Episcopal Apron
			with its corner tucked in. The Laystall. Journalists now our only
			Kings and Clergy (<a href="#page31">p. 31</a>).</p>

			<p class="headline_style_2"><span class="pagenum"><a id="page232" name="page232"></a>232</span><a href="#book_1_chapter_7" class="special_emphasis">Chap. VII.</a> Miscellaneous-Historical</p>

			<p>How Men and Fashions come and go. German Costume in the
			fifteenth century. By what strange chances do we live in History!
			The costume of Bolivar&#8217;s Cavalry (<a href="#page34">p. 34</a>).</p>

			<p class="headline_style_2"><a href="#book_1_chapter_8" class="special_emphasis">Chap. VIII.</a> The World out of Clothes</p>

			<p>Teufelsdröckh&#8217;s Theorem, &#8220;Society founded upon Cloth&#8221;; his
			Method, Intuition quickened by Experience.&#8212;The mysterious question,
			Who am I? Philosophic systems, all at fault: A deeper meditation
			has always taught, here and there an individual, that all visible things
			are appearances only; but also emblems and revelations of God.
			Teufelsdröckh first comes upon the question of Clothes: Baseness to
			which Clothing may bring us (<a href="#page37">p. 37</a>).</p>

			<p class="headline_style_2"><a href="#book_1_chapter_9" class="special_emphasis">Chap. IX.</a> Adamatism</p>

			<p>The universal utility of Clothes, and their higher mystic virtue,
			illustrated. Conception of Mankind stripped naked; and immediate
			consequent dissolution of civilised Society (<a href="#page43">p. 43</a>).</p>

			<p class="headline_style_2"><a href="#book_1_chapter_10" class="special_emphasis">Chap. X.</a> Pure Reason</p>

			<p>A Naked World possible, nay actually exists, under the clothed one.
			Man, in the eye of Pure Reason, a visible God&#8217;s Presence. The
			beginning of all wisdom, to look fixedly on Clothes till they become
			transparent. Wonder, the basis of Worship: Perennial in man.
			Modern Sciolists who cannot wonder: Teufelsdröckh&#8217;s contempt for,
			and advice to them (<a href="#page47">p. 47</a>).</p>

			<p class="headline_style_2"><a href="#book_1_chapter_11" class="special_emphasis">Chap. XI.</a> Prospective</p>

			<p>Nature not an Aggregate, but a Whole. All visible things are
			emblems, Clothes; and exist for a time only. The grand scope of the
			Philosophy of Clothes.&#8212;Biographic Documents arrive. Letter from
			Heuschrecke on the importance of Biography. Heterogeneous character
			of the documents: Editor sorely perplexed; but desperately grapples
			with his work (<a href="#page52">p. 52</a>).</p>

		</div>
		<div id="book_2_summary">
			<h3 class="section_title">BOOK II</h3>
			<p class="headline_style_2"><a href="#book_2_chapter_1" class="special_emphasis">Chap. I</a> Genesis</p>

			<p>Old Andreas Futteral and Gretchen his wife: their quiet home.
			Advent of a mysterious stranger, who deposits with them a young
			infant, the future Herr Diogenes Teufelsdröckh. After-yearnings of
			the youth for his unknown Father. Sovereign power of Names and
			Naming. Diogenes a flourishing Infant (<a href="#page61">p. 61</a>).</p>

			<p class="headline_style_2"><a href="#book_2_chapter_2" class="special_emphasis">Chap. II</a> Idyllic</p>

			<p>Happy Childhood! Entepfuhl: Sights, hearings and experiences
			of the boy Teufelsdröckh; their manifold teaching. Education; what
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page233" name="page233"></a>233</span>it can do, what cannot. Obedience our universal duty and destiny.
			Gneschen sees the good Gretchen pray (<a href="#page68">p. 68</a>).</p>

			<p class="headline_style_2"><a href="#book_2_chapter_3" class="special_emphasis">Chap. III</a> Pedagogy</p>

			<p>Teufelsdröckh&#8217;s School. His Education. How the ever-flowing
			Kuhbach speaks of Time and Eternity. The Hinterschlag Gymnasium;
			rude Boys; and pedant Professors. The need of true Teachers, and
			their due recognition. Father Andreas dies: and Teufelsdröckh learns
			the secret of his birth: His reflections thereon. The Nameless
			University. Statistics of Imposture much wanted. Bitter fruits of
			Rationalism: Teufelsdröckh&#8217;s religious difficulties. The young Englishman
			Herr Towgood. Modern Friendship (<a href="#page76">p. 76</a>).</p>

			<p class="headline_style_2"><a href="#book_2_chapter_4" class="special_emphasis">Chap. IV</a> Getting under Way</p>

			<p>The grand thaumaturgic Art of Thought. Difficulty in fitting
			Capability to Opportunity, or of getting underway. The advantage of
			Hunger and Bread-Studies. Teufelsdröckh has to enact the stern mono-drama
			of <em>No object and no rest</em>. Sufferings as Auscultator. Given up as
			a man of genius, Zähdarm House. Intolerable presumption of young
			men. Irony and its consequences. Teufelsdröckh&#8217;s Epitaph on Count
			Zähdarm (<a href="#page90">p. 90</a>).</p>

			<p class="headline_style_2"><a href="#book_2_chapter_5" class="special_emphasis">Chap. V</a> Romance</p>

			<p>Teufelsdröckh gives up his Profession. The heavenly mystery of
			Love. Teufelsdröckh&#8217;s feeling of worship towards women. First and
			only love. Blumine. Happy hearts and free tongues. The infinite
			nature of Fantasy. Love&#8217;s joyful progress; sudden dissolution; and
			final catastrophe (<a href="#page101">p. 101</a>).</p>

			<p class="headline_style_2"><a href="#book_2_chapter_6" class="special_emphasis">Chap. VI</a> Sorrows of Teufelsdröckh</p>

			<p>Teufelsdröckh&#8217;s demeanour thereupon. Turns pilgrim. A last wistful
			look on native Entepfuhl: Sunset amongst primitive Mountains.
			Basilisk-glance of the Barouche-and-four. Thoughts on View-hunting.
			Wanderings and Sorrowings (<a href="#page112">p. 112</a>).</p>

			<p class="headline_style_2"><a href="#book_2_chapter_7" class="special_emphasis">Chap. VII</a> The Everlasting No</p>

			<p>Loss of Hope, and of Belief. Profit-and-Loss Philosophy, Teufelsdröckh
			in his darkness and despair still clings to Truth and follows
			Duty. Inexpressible pains and fears of Unbelief. Fever-crisis:
			Protest against the Everlasting No: Baphometic Fire-baptism (p.
			121).</p>

			<p class="headline_style_2"><a href="#book_2_chapter_8" class="special_emphasis">Chap. VIII</a> Centre of Indifference</p>

			<p>Teufelsdröckh turns now outwardly to the <i>Not-me</i>; and finds wholesomer
			food. Ancient Cities: Mystery of their origin and growth:
			Invisible inheritances and possessions. Power and virtue of a true
			Book. Wagram Battlefield: War. Great Scenes beheld by the
			Pilgrim: Great Events, and Great Men. Napoleon, a divine missionary,
			preaching <i>La carrière ouverte aux talens</i>. Teufelsdröckh at the
			North Cape: Modern means of self-defence. Gunpowder and duelling.
			The Pilgrim, despising his miseries, reaches the Centre of Indifference
			(<a href="#page128">p. 128</a>).</p>

			<p class="headline_style_2"><span class="pagenum"><a id="page234" name="page234"></a>234</span><a href="#book_2_chapter_9" class="special_emphasis">Chap. IX</a> The Everlasting Yea</p>

			<p>Temptations in the Wilderness: Victory over the Tempter. Annihilation
			of Self. Belief in God, and love to Man. The origin of
			Evil, a problem ever requiring to be solved anew: Teufelsdröckh&#8217;s
			solution. Love of Happiness a vain whim: A Higher in man than
			Love of Happiness. The Everlasting Yea. Worship of Sorrow.
			Voltaire: his task now finished. Conviction worthless, impossible,
			without Conduct. The true Ideal, the Actual: Up and work!
			(<a href="#page138">p. 138</a>).</p>

			<p class="headline_style_2"><a href="#book_2_chapter_10" class="special_emphasis">Chap. X</a> Pause</p>

			<p>Conversion; a spiritual attainment peculiar to the modern Era.
			Teufelsdröckh accepts Authorship as his divine calling. The scope
			of the command <em>Thou shalt not steal</em>.&#8212;Editor begins to suspect the
			authenticity of the Biographical documents; and abandons them for
			the great Clothes volume. Result of the preceding ten Chapters:
			Insight into the character of Teufelsdröckh: His fundamental beliefs,
			and how he was forced to seek and find them (<a href="#page149">p. 149</a>).</p>

		</div>
		<div id="book_3_summary">
			<h3 class="chapter_title">BOOK III</h3>

			<p class="headline_style_2"><a href="#book_3_chapter_1" class="special_emphasis">Chap. I</a> Incident in Modern History</p>

			<p>Story of George Fox the Quaker; and his perennial suit of Leather.
			A man God-possessed, witnessing for spiritual freedom and manhood
			(<a href="#page156">p. 156</a>).</p>

			<p class="headline_style_2"><a href="#book_3_chapter_2" class="special_emphasis">Chap. II</a> Church-Clothes</p>

			<p>Church-Clothes defined; the Forms under which the Religious
			principle is temporarily embodied. Outward Religion originates by
			Society: Society becomes possible by Religion. The condition of
			Church-Clothes in our time (<a href="#page161">p. 161</a>).</p>

			<p class="headline_style_2"><a href="#book_3_chapter_3" class="special_emphasis">Chap. III</a> Symbols</p>

			<p>The benignant efficacies of Silence and Secrecy. Symbols; revelations
			of the Infinite in the Finite: Man everywhere encompassed by
			them; lives and works by them. Theory of Motive-millwrights, a
			false account of human nature. Symbols of an extrinsic value; as
			Banners, Standards: Of intrinsic value; as Works of Art, Lives and
			Deaths of Heroic men. Religious Symbols; Christianity. Symbols
			hallowed by Time; but finally defaced and desecrated. Many superannuated
			Symbols in our time, needing removal (<a href="#page163">p. 163</a>).</p>

			<p class="headline_style_2"><a href="#book_3_chapter_4" class="special_emphasis">Chap. IV</a> Helotage</p>

			<p>Heuschrecke&#8217;s Malthusian Tract, and Teufelsdröckh&#8217;s marginal notes
			thereon. The true workman, for daily bread, or spiritual bread, to be
			honoured; and no other. The real privation of the Poor not poverty
			or toil, but ignorance. Over-population: With a world like ours
			and wide as ours, can there be too many men? Emigration (<a href="#page170">p. 170</a>).</p>

			<p class="headline_style_2"><span class="pagenum"><a id="page235" name="page235"></a>235</span><a href="#book_3_chapter_5" class="special_emphasis">Chap. V</a> The Phœnix</p>

			<p>Teufelsdröckh considers Society as <em>dead</em>; its soul (Religion) gone,
			its body (existing Institutions) going. Utilitarianism, needing little
			farther preaching, is now in full activity of Destruction.&#8212;Teufelsdröckh
			would yield to the Inevitable, accounting that the best:
			Assurance of a fairer Living Society, arising, Phœnix-like, out of the
			ruins of the old dead one. Before that Phœnix death-birth is accomplished,
			long time, struggle, and suffering must intervene (<a href="#page174">p. 174</a>).</p>

			<p class="headline_style_2"><a href="#book_3_chapter_6" class="special_emphasis">Chap. VI</a> Old Clothes</p>

			<p>Courtesy due from all men to all men: The Body of Man a Revelation
			in the Flesh. Teufelsdröckh&#8217;s respect for Old Clothes, as the
			&#8216;Ghosts of Life.&#8217; Walk in Monmouth Street, and meditations there
			(<a href="#page179">p. 179</a>).</p>

			<p class="headline_style_2"><a href="#book_3_chapter_7" class="special_emphasis">Chap. VII</a> Organic Filaments</p>

			<p>Destruction and Creation ever proceed together; and organic filaments
			of the Future are even now spinning. Wonderful connection of
			each man with all men; and of each generation with all generations,
			before and after: Mankind is One. Sequence and progress of all
			human work, whether of creation or destruction, from age to age.&#8212;Titles,
			hitherto derived from Fighting, must give way to others. Kings
			will remain and their title. Political Freedom, not to be attained by
			any mechanical contrivance. Hero-worship, perennial amongst men;
			the cornerstone of polities in the Future. Organic filaments of the
			New Religion: Newspapers and Literature. Let the faithful soul
			take courage! (<a href="#page183">p. 183</a>).</p>

			<p class="headline_style_2"><a href="#book_3_chapter_8" class="special_emphasis">Chap. VIII</a> Natural Supernaturalism</p>

			<p>Deep significance of Miracles. Littleness of human Science: Divine
			incomprehensibility of Nature. Custom blinds us to the miraculousness
			of daily-recurring miracles; so do Names. Space and Time, appearances
			only; forms of human Thought: A glimpse of Immortality. How
			Space hides from us the wondrousness of our commonest powers; and
			Time, the divinely miraculous course of human history (<a href="#page191">p. 191</a>).</p>

			<p class="headline_style_2"><a href="#book_3_chapter_9" class="special_emphasis">Chap. IX</a> Circumspective</p>

			<p>Recapitulation. Editor congratulates the few British readers who
			have accompanied Teufelsdröckh through all his speculations. The
			true use of the <i>Sartor Resartus</i>, to exhibit the Wonder of daily life
			and common things; and to show that all Forms are but Clothes, and
			temporary. Practical inferences enough will follow (<a href="#page201">p. 201</a>).</p>

			<p class="headline_style_2"><a href="#book_3_chapter_10" class="special_emphasis">Chap. X</a> The Dandiacal Body</p>

			<p>The Dandy defined. The Dandiacal Sect a new modification of the
			primeval superstition Self-worship: How to be distinguished. Their
			Sacred Books (Fashionable Novels) unreadable. Dandyism&#8217;s Articles
			of Faith.&#8212;Brotherhood of Poor-Slaves: vowed to perpetual Poverty;
			worshippers of Earth; distinguished by peculiar costume and diet.
			<span class="pagenum"><a id="page236" name="page236"></a>236</span>Picture of a Poor-Slave Household; and of a Dandiacal. Teufelsdröckh
			fears these two Sects may spread, till they part all England between
			them, and then frightfully collide (<a href="#page204">p. 204</a>).</p>

			<p class="headline_style_2"><a href="#book_3_chapter_11" class="special_emphasis">Chap. XI</a> Tailors</p>

			<p>Injustice done to Tailors, actual and metaphorical. Their rights and
			great services will one day be duly recognised (<a href="#page216">p. 216</a>).</p>

			<p class="headline_style_2"><a href="#book_3_chapter_12" class="special_emphasis">Chap. XII</a> Farewell</p>

			<p>Teufelsdröckh&#8217;s strange manner of speech, but resolute, truthful
			character: His purpose seemingly to proselytise, to unite the wakeful
			earnest in these dark times. Letter from Hofrath Heuschrecke
			announcing that Teufelsdröckh has disappeared from Weissnichtwo.
			Editor guesses he will appear again, Friendly Farewell (<a href="#page219">p. 219</a>).</p>


		</div>
	</div>
</div>
<div id="onheroes" class="work">
	<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page237" name="page237"></a>237</span></p>
	<h1 class="work_title">ON HEROES, HERO-WORSHIP, AND THE HEROIC IN HISTORY</h1>
	<p><span class="pagenum blank_page"><a id="page238" name="page238"></a>238</span></p>
	<div id="lecturei" class="lecture">
		<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page239" name="page239"></a>239</span></p>

		<p class="lecture_head">LECTURE I</p>

		<h3 class="lecture_title">THE HERO AS DIVINITY. ODIN. PAGANISM: SCANDINAVIAN MYTHOLOGY</h3>

		<p class="lecture_date">[Tuesday, 5th May 1840]</p>

		<p><span class="first_word">We</span> have undertaken to discourse here for a little on
		Great Men, their manner of appearance in our world&#8217;s
		business, how they have shaped themselves in the
		world&#8217;s history, what ideas men formed of them, what
		work they did;&#8212;on Heroes, namely, and on their reception
		and performance; what I call Hero-worship and the
		Heroic in human affairs. Too evidently this is a large
		topic; deserving quite other treatment than we can expect
		to give it at present. A large topic; indeed, an illimitable
		one; wide as Universal History itself. For, as
		I take it, Universal History, the history of what man
		has accomplished in this world, is at bottom the History
		of the Great Men who have worked here. They were
		the leaders of men, these great ones; the modellers,
		patterns, and in a wide sense creators, of whatsoever
		the general mass of men contrived to do or to attain;
		all things that we see standing accomplished in the world
		are properly the outer material result, the practical
		realisation and embodiment, of Thoughts that dwelt in
		the Great Men sent into the world: the soul of the whole
		world&#8217;s history, it may justly be considered, were the
		history of these. Too clearly it is a topic we shall do
		no justice to in this place!</p>

		<p>One comfort is, that Great Men, taken up in any way,
		are profitable company. We cannot look, however
		imperfectly, upon a great man, without gaining something
		by him. He is the living light-fountain, which
		it is good and pleasant to be near. The light which
		enlightens, which has enlightened the darkness of the
		world; and this not as a kindled lamp only, but rather
		as a natural luminary shining by the gift of Heaven;
		a flowing light-fountain, as I say, of native original
		insight, of manhood and heroic nobleness;&#8212;in whose
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page240" name="page240"></a>240</span>radiance all souls feel that it is well with them. On any
		terms whatsoever, you will not grudge to wander in
		such neighbourhood for a while. These Six classes of
		Heroes, chosen out of widely-distant countries and
		epochs, and in mere external figure differing altogether,
		ought, if we look faithfully at them, to illustrate several
		things for us. Could we see <em>them</em> well, we should get
		some glimpses into the very marrow of the world&#8217;s
		history. How happy, could I but, in any measure, in
		such times as these, make manifest to you the meanings
		of Heroism; the divine relation (for I may well call it
		such) which in all times unites a Great Man to other
		men; and thus, as it were, not exhaust my subject, but
		so much as break ground on it! At all events, I must
		make the attempt.</p>

		<p>It is well said, in every sense, that a man&#8217;s religion
		is the chief fact with regard to him. A man&#8217;s, or a
		nation of men&#8217;s. By religion I do not mean here the
		church-creed which he professes, the articles of faith
		which he will sign and, in words or otherwise, assert;
		not this wholly, in many cases not this at all. We
		see men of all kinds of professed creeds attain to
		almost all degrees of worth or worthlessness under each
		or any of them. This is not what I call religion, this
		profession and assertion; which is often only a profession
		and assertion from the outworks of the man, from
		the mere argumentative region of him, if even so deep
		as that. But the thing a man does practically believe
		(and this is often enough <em>without</em> asserting it even to
		himself, much less to others); the thing a man does
		practically lay to heart, and know for certain, concerning
		his vital relations to this mysterious Universe, and
		his duty and destiny there, that is in all cases the
		primary thing for him, and creatively determines all the
		rest. That is his <em>religion</em>; or it may be, his mere scepticism
		and <em>no-religion</em>: the manner it is in which he feels
		himself to be spiritually related to the Unseen World or
		No-World; and I say, if you tell me what that is, you
		tell me to a very great extent what the man is, what
		the kind of things he will do is. Of a man or of a
		nation we inquire, therefore, first of all, What religion
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page241" name="page241"></a>241</span>they had? Was it Heathenism,&#8212;plurality of gods,
		mere sensuous representation of this Mystery of Life,
		and for chief recognised element therein Physical Force?
		Was it Christianism; faith in an Invisible, not as real
		only, but as the only reality; Time, through every
		meanest moment of it, resting on Eternity; Pagan
		empire of Force displaced by a nobler supremacy, that
		of Holiness? Was it Scepticism, uncertainty and
		inquiry whether there was an Unseen World, any
		Mystery of Life except a mad one;&#8212;doubt as to all
		this, or perhaps unbelief and flat denial? Answering
		of this question is giving us the soul of the history of
		the man or nation. The thoughts they had were the
		parents of the actions they did; their feelings were
		parents of their thoughts: it was the unseen and
		spiritual in them that determined the outward and
		actual;&#8212;their religion, as I say, was the great fact
		about them. In these Discourses, limited as we are,
		it will be good to direct our survey chiefly to that
		religious phasis of the matter. That once known well,
		all is known. We have chosen as the first Hero in our
		series, Odin the central figure of Scandinavian
		Paganism; an emblem to us of a most extensive
		province of things. Let us look for a little at the Hero
		as Divinity, the oldest primary form of Heroism.</p>

		<p>Surely it seems a very strange-looking thing this
		Paganism; almost inconceivable to us in these days.
		A bewildering, inextricable jungle of delusions, confusions,
		falsehoods and absurdities, covering the whole
		field of Life! A thing that fills us with astonishment,
		almost, if it were possible, with incredulity,&#8212;for truly
		it is not easy to understand that sane men could ever
		calmly, with their eyes open, believe and live by such
		a set of doctrines. That men should have worshipped
		their poor fellow-man as a God, and not him only, but
		stocks and stones, and all manner of animate and
		inanimate objects; and fashioned for themselves such
		a distracted chaos of hallucinations by way of Theory
		of the Universe: all this looks like an incredible fable.
		Nevertheless it is a clear fact that they did it. Such
		hideous inextricable jungle of misworships, misbeliefs,
		men, made as we are, did actually hold by, and live at
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page242" name="page242"></a>242</span>home in. This is strange. Yes, we may pause in
		sorrow and silence over the depths of darkness that are
		in man; if we rejoice in the heights of purer vision he
		has attained to. Such things were and are in man; in
		all men; in us too.</p>

		<p>Some speculators have a short way of accounting for
		the Pagan religion: mere quackery, priestcraft, and
		dupery, say they; no sane man ever did believe it,&#8212;merely
		contrived to persuade other men, not worthy of
		the name of sane, to believe it! It will be often our
		duty to protest against this sort of hypothesis about
		men&#8217;s doings and history; and I here, on the very
		threshold, protest against it in reference to Paganism,
		and to all other <em>isms</em> by which man has ever for a length
		of time striven to walk in this world. They have all
		had a truth in them, or men would not have taken them
		up. Quackery and dupery do abound; in religions,
		above all in the more advanced decaying stages of
		religions, they have fearfully abounded: but quackery
		was never the originating influence in such things; it
		was not the health and life of such things, but their
		disease, the sure precursor of their being about to die!
		Let us never forget this. It seems to me a most mournful
		hypothesis, that of quackery giving birth to any
		faith even in savage men. Quackery gives birth to
		nothing; gives death to all things. We shall not see
		into the true heart of anything, or if we look merely at
		the quackeries of it; if we do not reject the quackeries
		altogether; as mere diseases, corruptions, with which
		our and all men&#8217;s sole duty is to have done with them,
		to sweep them out of our thoughts as out of our
		practice. Man everywhere is the born enemy of lies.
		I find Grand Lamaism itself to have a kind of truth
		in it. Read the candid, clear-sighted, rather sceptical
		Mr Turner&#8217;s <i>Account of his Embassy</i> to that country,
		and see. They have their belief, these poor Thibet
		people, that Providence sends down always an Incarnation
		of Himself into every generation. At bottom some
		belief in a kind of Pope! At bottom still better, belief
		that there is a <i>Greatest</i> Man; that <em>he</em> is discoverable;
		that, once discovered, we ought to treat him with an
		obedience which knows no bounds! This is the truth
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page243" name="page243"></a>243</span>of Grand Lamaism; the &#8216;discoverability&#8217; is the only
		error here. The Thibet priests have methods of their
		own of discovering what Man is Greatest, fit to be
		supreme over them. Bad methods: but are they so
		much worse than our methods,&#8212;of understanding him
		to be always the eldest born of a certain genealogy?
		Alas, it is a difficult thing to find good methods for!&#8212;We
		shall begin to have a chance of understanding
		Paganism, when we first admit that to its followers it
		was, at one time, earnestly true. Let us consider it
		very certain that men did believe in Paganism; men
		with open eyes, sound senses, men made altogether like
		ourselves; that we, had we been there, should have
		believed in it. Ask now, What Paganism could have
		been?</p>

		<p>Another theory, somewhat more respectable, attributes
		such things to Allegory. It was a play of poetic
		minds, say these theorists; a shadowing-forth, in
		allegorical fable, in personification and visual form, of
		what such poetic minds had known and felt of this
		Universe. Which agrees, add they, with a primary law
		of human nature, still everywhere observably at work,
		though in less important things, That what a man feels
		intensely, he struggles to speak-out of him, to see represented
		before him in visual shape, and as if with a kind
		of life and historical reality in it. Now doubtless there
		is such a law, and it is one of the deepest in human
		nature; neither need we doubt that it did operate fundamentally
		in this business. The hypothesis which
		ascribes Paganism wholly or mostly to this agency, I
		call a little more respectable; but I cannot yet call it the
		true hypothesis. Think, would <em>we</em> believe, and take
		with us as our life-guidance, an allegory, a poetic sport?
		Not sport but earnest is what we should require. It is
		a most earnest thing to be alive in this world; to die
		is not sport for a man. Man&#8217;s life never was a sport
		to him; it was a stern reality, altogether a serious matter
		to be alive!</p>

		<p>I find, therefore, that though these Allegory theorists
		are on the way towards truth in this matter, they have
		not reached it either. Pagan Religion is indeed an
		Allegory, a Symbol of what men felt and knew about
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page244" name="page244"></a>244</span>the Universe; and all Religions are Symbols of that,
		altering always as that alters: but it seems to me a
		radical perversion, and even <em>in</em>version, of the business,
		to put that forward as the origin and moving cause,
		when it was rather the result and termination. To get
		beautiful allegories, a perfect poetic symbol, was not the
		want of men; but to know what they were to believe
		about this Universe, what course they were to steer in
		it; what, in this mysterious Life of theirs, they had to
		hope and to fear, to do and to forbear doing. The
		<i>Pilgrim&#8217;s Progress</i> is an Allegory, and a beautiful, just
		and serious one: but consider whether Bunyan&#8217;s
		Allegory could have <em>preceded</em> the Faith it symbolises!
		The Faith had to be already there, standing believed by
		everybody;&#8212;of which the Allegory could <em>then</em> become a
		shadow; and, with all its seriousness, we may say a
		<em>sportful</em> shadow, a mere play of the Fancy, in comparison
		with that awful Fact and scientific certainty
		which it poetically strives to emblem. The Allegory is
		the product of the certainty, not the producer of it; not
		in Bunyan&#8217;s, nor in any other case. For Paganism,
		therefore, we have still to inquire, Whence came that
		scientific certainty, the parent of such a bewildered heap
		of allegories, errors and confusions? How was it, what
		was it?</p>

		<p>Surely it were a foolish attempt to pretend &#8216;explaining,&#8217;
		in this place, or in any place, such a phenomenon
		as that far-distant distracted cloudy imbroglio of
		Paganism,&#8212;more like a cloudfield than a distant continent
		of firm land and facts! It is no longer a reality,
		yet it was one. We ought to understand that this seeming
		cloudfield was once a reality; that not poetic
		allegory, least of all that dupery and deception was the
		origin of it. Men, I say, never did believe idle songs,
		never risked their soul&#8217;s life on allegories; men in all
		times, especially in early earnest times, have had an
		instinct for detecting quacks, for detesting quacks. Let
		us try if, leaving out both the quack theory and the
		allegory one, and listening with affectionate attention
		to that far-off confused rumour of the Pagan ages, we
		cannot ascertain so much as this at least, That there was
		a kind of fact at the heart of them; that they too were
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page245" name="page245"></a>245</span>not mendacious and distracted, but in their own poor
		way true and sane!</p>

		<p>You remember that fancy of Plato&#8217;s, of a man who
		had grown to maturity in some dark distance, and was
		brought on a sudden into the upper air to see the sun
		rise. What would his wonder be, his rapt astonishment
		at the sight we daily witness with indifference! With
		the free open sense of a child, yet with the ripe faculty
		of a man, his whole heart would be kindled by that sight,
		he would discern it well to be Godlike, his soul would
		fall down in worship before it. Now, just such a childlike
		greatness was in the primitive nations. The first
		Pagan Thinker among rude men, the first man that
		began to think, was precisely this child-man of Plato&#8217;s.
		Simple, open as a child, yet with the depth and strength
		of a man. Nature had as yet no name to him; he had
		not yet united under a name the infinite variety of sights,
		sounds, shapes and motions, which we now collectively
		name Universe, Nature, or the like,&#8212;and so with a
		name dismiss it from us. To the wild deep-hearted man
		all was yet new, not veiled under names or formulas;
		it stood naked, flashing-in on him there, beautiful,
		awful, unspeakable. Nature was to this man, what to
		the Thinker and Prophet it forever is, <em>preter</em>natural.
		This green flowery rock-built earth, the trees, the mountains,
		rivers, many-sounding seas;&#8212;that great deep sea
		of azure that swims overhead; the winds sweeping
		through it; the black cloud fashioning itself together,
		now pouring out fire, now hail and rain; what <em>is</em> it?
		Ay, what? At bottom we do not yet know; we can
		never know at all. It is not by our superior insight that
		we escape the difficulty; it is by our superior levity, our
		inattention, our <em>want</em> of insight. It is by <em>not</em> thinking
		that we cease to wonder at it. Hardened round us,
		encasing wholly every notion we form, is a wrappage of
		traditions, hearsays, mere <em>words</em>. We call that fire of the
		black thundercloud &#8216;electricity,&#8217; and lecture learnedly
		about it, and grind the like of it out of glass and silk:
		but <em>what</em> is it? What made it? Whence comes it?
		Whither goes it? Science has done much for us; but it
		is a poor science that would hide from us the great deep
		sacred infinitude of Nescience, whither we can never
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page246" name="page246"></a>246</span>penetrate, on which all science swims as a mere superficial
		film. This world, after all our science and sciences,
		is still a miracle; wonderful, inscrutable, <em>magical</em> and
		more, to whosoever will <em>think</em> of it.</p>

		<p>That great mystery of <span class="special_emphasis">Time</span>, were there no other: the
		illimitable, silent, never-resting thing called Time, rolling,
		rushing on, swift, silent, like an all-embracing
		ocean-tide, on which we and all the Universe swim like
		exhalations, like apparitions which <em>are</em>, and then <i>are
		not</i>: this is forever very literally a miracle; a thing to
		strike us dumb,&#8212;for we have no word to speak about
		it. This Universe, ah me&#8212;what could the wild man
		know of it; what can we yet know? That it is a Force,
		and thousandfold Complexity of Forces; a Force which
		is <em>not we</em>. That is all; it is not we, it is altogether
		different from <em>us</em>. Force, Force, everywhere Force; we
		ourselves a mysterious Force in the centre of that.
		&#8216;There is not a leaf rotting on the highway but has Force
		in it: how else could it rot?&#8217; Nay surely, to the
		Atheistic Thinker, if such a one were possible, it must
		be a miracle too, this huge illimitable whirlwind of
		Force, which envelops us here; never-resting whirlwind,
		high as Immensity, old as Eternity. What is it? God&#8217;s
		creation, the religious people answer; it is the Almighty
		God&#8217;s! Atheistic science babbles poorly of it, with
		scientific nomenclatures, experiments and what-not, as
		if it were a poor dead thing, to be bottled up in Leyden
		jars and sold over counters: but the natural sense of
		man, in all times, if he will honestly apply his sense,
		proclaims it to be a living thing,&#8212;ah, an unspeakable,
		godlike thing; towards which the best attitude for us,
		after never so much science, is awe, devout prostration
		and humility of soul; worship if not in words, then in
		silence.</p>

		<p>But now I remark farther: What in such a time as
		ours it requires a Prophet or Poet to teach us, namely,
		the stripping-off of those poor undevout wrappages,
		nomenclatures and scientific hearsays,&#8212;-this, the ancient
		earnest soul, as yet unencumbered with these things,
		did for itself. The world, which is now divine only to
		the gifted, was then divine to whosoever would turn his
		eye upon it. He stood bare before it face to face. &#8216;All
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page247" name="page247"></a>247</span>was Godlike or God:&#8217;&#8212;Jean Paul still finds it so; the
		giant Jean Paul, who has power to escape out of hearsays:
		but there then were no hearsays. Canopus shining-down
		over the desert, with its blue diamond brightness
		(that wild blue spirit-like brightness, far brighter
		than we ever witness here), would pierce into the heart
		of the wild Ishmaelitish man, whom it was guiding
		through the solitary waste there. To his wild heart,
		with all feelings in it, with no <em>speech</em> for any feeling, it
		may seem a little eye, that Canopus, glancing-out on
		him from the great deep Eternity; revealing the inner
		Splendour to him. Cannot we understand how these
		men <em>worshipped</em> Canopus; became what we call
		Sabeans, worshipping the stars? Such is to me the
		secret of all forms of Paganism. Worship is transcendent
		wonder; wonder for which there is now no limit or
		measure; that is worship. To these primeval men, all
		things and everything they saw exist beside them were
		an emblem of the Godlike, of some God.</p>

		<p>And look what perennial fibre of truth was in that.
		To us also, through every star, through every blade of
		grass, is not a God made visible, if we will open our
		minds and eyes? We do not worship in that way now:
		but is it not reckoned still a merit, proof of what we call
		a &#8216;poetic nature,&#8217; that we recognise how every object
		has a divine beauty in it; how every object still verily
		is &#8216;a window through which we may look into Infinitude
		itself&#8217;? He that can discern the loveliness of
		things, we call him Poet, Painter, Man of Genius, gifted,
		lovable. These poor Sabeans did even what he does,&#8212;in
		their own fashion. That they did it, in what fashion
		soever, was a merit: better than what the entirely stupid
		man did, what the horse and camel did,&#8212;namely,
		nothing!</p>

		<p>But now if all things whatsoever that we look upon
		are emblems to us of the Highest God, I add that more
		so than any of them is man such an emblem. You have
		heard of St. Chrysostom&#8217;s celebrated saying in reference
		to the Shekinah, or Ark of Testimony, visible Revelation
		of God, among the Hebrews: &#8220;The true Shekinah is
		Man!&#8221; Yes, it is even so: this is no vain phrase; it is
		veritably so. The essence of our being, the mystery in
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page248" name="page248"></a>248</span>us that calls itself &#8220;I,&#8221;&#8212;ah, what words have we for
		such things?&#8212;is a breath of Heaven; the Highest Being
		reveals himself in <em>man</em>. This body, these faculties, this
		life of ours, is it not all as a vesture for that Unnamed?
		&#8216;There is but one Temple in the Universe,&#8217; says the
		devout Novalis, &#8216;and that is the Body of Man. Nothing
		is holier than that high form. Bending before men is
		a reverence done to this Revelation in the Flesh. We
		touch Heaven when we lay our hand on a human body!&#8217;
		This sounds much like a mere flourish of rhetoric; but it
		is not so. If well meditated, it will turn out to be a
		scientific fact; the expression, in such words as can be
		had, of the actual truth of the thing. <em>We</em> are the
		miracle of miracles,&#8212;the great inscrutable mystery of
		God. We cannot understand it, we know not how to
		speak of it; but we may feel and know, if we like, that
		it is verily so.</p>

		<p>Well; these truths were once more readily felt than
		now. The young generations of the world, who had in
		them the freshness of young children, and yet the depth
		of earnest men, who did not think that they had finished-off
		all things in Heaven and Earth by merely giving
		them scientific names, but had to gaze direct at them
		there, with awe and wonder: they felt better what of
		divinity is in man and Nature;&#8212;they, without being
		mad, could <em>worship</em> Nature, and man more than anything
		else in Nature. Worship, that is, as I said above,
		admire without limit: this, in the full use of their
		faculties, with all sincerity of heart, they could do. I
		consider Hero-worship to be the grand modifying element
		in that ancient system of thought. What I called
		the perplexed jungle of Paganism sprang, we may say,
		out of many roots: every admiration, adoration of a
		star or natural object, was a root or fibre of a root; but
		Hero-worship is the deepest root of all; the tap-root,
		from which in a great degree all the rest were nourished
		and grown.</p>

		<p>And now if worship even of a star had some meaning
		in it, how much more might that of a Hero! Worship
		of a Hero is transcendent admiration of a Great Man.
		I say great men are still admirable; I say there is, at
		bottom, nothing else admirable! No nobler feeling
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page249" name="page249"></a>249</span>than this of admiration for one higher than himself
		dwells in the breast of man. It is to this hour, and at
		all hours, the vivifying influence in man&#8217;s life. Religion
		I find stand upon it; not Paganism only, but far higher
		and truer religions,&#8212;all religion hitherto known. Hero-worship,
		heartfelt prostrate admiration, submission,
		burning, boundless, for a noblest godlike Form of Man,&#8212;is
		not that the germ of Christianity itself? The
		greatest of all Heroes is One&#8212;whom we do not name
		here! Let sacred silence meditate that sacred matter;
		you will find it the ultimate perfection of a principle
		extant throughout man&#8217;s whole history on earth.</p>

		<p>Or coming into lower, less <em>un</em>speakable provinces, is
		not all Loyalty akin to religious Faith also? Faith is
		loyalty to some inspired Teacher, some spiritual Hero.
		And what therefore is loyalty proper, the life-breath of
		all society, but an effluence of Hero-worship, submissive
		admiration for the truly great? Society is founded on
		Hero-worship. All dignities of rank, on which human
		association rests, are what we may call a <i>Hero</i>archy
		(Government of Heroes),&#8212;or a Hierarchy, for it is
		&#8216;sacred&#8217; enough withal! The Duke means <i>Dux</i>,
		Leader; King is <i>Kön-ning</i>, <i>Kan-ning</i>, Man that <em>knows</em>
		or <em>cans</em>. Society everywhere is some representation,
		not <em>in</em>supportably inaccurate, of a graduated Worship
		of Heroes;&#8212;reverence and obedience done to men really
		great and wise. Not <em>in</em>supportably inaccurate, I say!
		They are all as bank-notes, these social dignitaries, all
		representing gold;&#8212;and several of them, alas, always
		are <em>forged</em> notes. We can do with some forged false
		notes; with a good many even; but not with all, or the
		most of them forged! No: there have to come revolutions
		then; cries of Democracy, Liberty, and Equality,
		and I know not what:&#8212;the notes being all false, and
		no gold to be had for <em>them</em>, people take to crying in
		their despair that there is no gold, that there never was
		any!&#8212;&#8216;Gold,&#8217; Hero-worship, <em>is</em> nevertheless, as it was
		always and everywhere, and cannot cease till man himself
		ceases.</p>

		<p>I am well aware that in these days Hero-worship, the
		thing I call Hero-worship, professes to have gone out,
		and finally ceased. This, for reasons which it will be
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page250" name="page250"></a>250</span>worth while some time to inquire into, is an age that as
		it were denies the existence of great men; denies the
		desirableness of great men. Show our critics a great
		man, a Luther for example, they begin to what they
		call &#8216;account&#8217; for him; not to worship him, but take
		the dimensions of him,&#8212;and bring him out to be a little
		kind of man! He was the &#8216;creature of the Time,&#8217; they
		say; the Time called him forth, the Time did everything,
		he nothing&#8212;but what we the little critic could have done
		too! This seems to me but melancholy work. The
		Time call forth? Alas, we have known Times <em>call</em>
		loudly enough for their great man; but not find him
		when they called! He was not there; Providence had
		not sent him; the Time, <em>calling</em> its loudest, had to go
		down to confusion and wreck because he would not
		come when called.</p>

		<p>For if we will think of it, no Time need have gone
		to ruin, could it have <em>found</em> a man great enough, a
		man wise and good enough: wisdom to discern truly
		what the Time wanted, valour to lead it on the right
		road thither; these are the salvation of any Time. But
		I liken common languid Times, with their unbelief,
		distress, perplexity, with their languid doubting characters
		and embarrassed circumstances, impotently
		crumbling-down into ever worse distress towards final
		ruin;&#8212;all this I liken to dry dead fuel, waiting for the
		lightning out of Heaven that shall kindle it. The great
		man, with his free force direct out of God&#8217;s own hand,
		is the lightning. His word is the wise healing word
		which all can believe in. All blazes round him now,
		when he has once struck on it, into fire like his own.
		The dry mouldering sticks are thought to have called
		him forth. They did want him greatly; but as to calling
		him forth&#8212;!&#8212;Those are critics of small vision, I
		think, who cry: &#8220;See, is it not the sticks that made the
		fire?&#8221; No sadder proof can be given by a man of his
		own littleness than disbelief in great men. There is no
		sadder symptom of a generation than such general blindness
		to the spiritual lightning, with faith only in the
		heap of barren dead fuel. It is the last consummation
		of unbelief. In all epochs of the world&#8217;s history, we
		shall find the Great Man to have been the indispensable
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page251" name="page251"></a>251</span>saviour of his epoch;&#8212;the lightning, without which
		the fuel never would have burnt. The History of the
		World, I said already, was the Biography of Great
		Men.</p>

		<p>Such small critics do what they can to promote unbelief
		and universal spiritual paralysis; but happily they cannot
		always completely succeed. In all times it is possible
		for a man to arise great enough to feel that they
		and their doctrines are chimeras and cobwebs. And
		what is notable, in no time whatever can they entirely
		eradicate out of living men&#8217;s hearts a certain altogether
		peculiar reverence for Great Men; genuine admiration,
		loyalty, adoration, however dim and perverted it may
		be. Hero-worship endures for ever while man endures.
		Boswell venerates his Johnson, right truly even in the
		Eighteenth century. The unbelieving French believe
		in their Voltaire; and burst-out round him into very
		curious Hero-worship, in that last act of his life when
		they &#8216;stifle him under roses.&#8217; It has always seemed to
		me extremely curious this of Voltaire. Truly, if Christianity
		be the highest instance of Hero-worship, then we
		may find here in Voltaireism one of the lowest! He
		whose life was that of a kind of Antichrist, does again
		on this side exhibit a curious contrast. No people ever
		were so little prone to admire at all as those French of
		Voltaire. <i>Persiflage</i> was the character of their whole
		mind; adoration had nowhere a place in it. Yet see!
		The old man of Ferney comes up to Paris; an old,
		tottering, infirm man of eighty-four years. They feel
		that he too is a kind of Hero; that he has spent his life
		in opposing error and injustice, delivering Calases,
		unmasking hypocrites in high places;&#8212;in short that <em>he</em>
		too, though in a strange way, has fought like a valiant
		man. They feel withal that, if <em>persiflage</em> be the great
		thing, there never was such a <i>persifleur</i>. He is the
		realised ideal of every one of them; the thing they are
		all wanting to be; of all Frenchmen the most French.
		<em>He</em> is properly their god,&#8212;such god as they are fit for.
		Accordingly all persons, from the Queen Antoinette to
		the Douanier at the Porte St. Denis, do they not worship
		him? People of quality disguise themselves as tavern-waiters.
		The Maître de Poste, with a broad oath,
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page252" name="page252"></a>252</span>orders his Postillion, &#8220;<i>Va bon train</i>; thou art driving
		M. de Voltaire.&#8221; At Paris his carriage is &#8216;the nucleus
		of a comet, whose train fills whole streets.&#8217; The ladies
		pluck a hair or two from his fur, to keep it as a sacred
		relic. There was nothing highest, beautifulest, noblest
		in all France, that did not feel this man to be higher,
		beautifuler, nobler.</p>

		<p>Yes, from Norse Odin to English Samuel Johnson,
		from the divine Founder of Christianity to the withered
		Pontiff of Encyclopedism, in all times and places, the
		Hero has been worshipped. It will ever be so. We all
		love great men; love, venerate, and bow down submissive
		before great men: nay can we honestly bow down
		to anything else? Ah, does not every true man feel
		that he is himself made higher by doing reverence to
		what is really above him? No nobler or more blessed
		feeling dwells in man&#8217;s heart. And to me it is very
		cheering to consider that no sceptical logic, or general
		triviality, insincerity and aridity of any Time and its
		influences can destroy this noble inborn loyalty and
		worship that is in man. In times of unbelief, which
		soon have to become times of revolution, much down-rushing,
		sorrowful decay and ruin is visible to everybody.
		For myself in these days, I seem to see in
		this indestructibility of Hero-worship the everlasting
		adamant lower than which the confused wreck of
		revolutionary things cannot fall. The confused wreck
		of things crumbling and even crashing and tumbling all
		round us in these revolutionary ages, will get down so
		far; <em>no</em> farther. It is an eternal corner-stone, from
		which they can begin to build themselves up again. That
		man, in some sense or other, worships Heroes; that we
		all of us reverence and must ever reverence Great Men:
		this is, to me, the living rock amid all rushings-down
		whatsoever;&#8212;the one fixed point in modern revolutionary
		history, otherwise as if bottomless and shoreless.</p>

		<p class="post_thoughtbreak">So much of truth, only under an ancient obsolete
		vesture, but the spirit of it still true, do I find in the
		Paganism of old nations. Nature is still divine, the
		revelation of the workings of God; the Hero is still
		worshipable: this, under poor cramped incipient forms,
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page253" name="page253"></a>253</span>is what all Pagan religions have struggled, as they
		could, to set forth. I think Scandinavian Paganism, to
		us here, is more interesting than any other. It is, for
		one thing, the latest; it continued in these regions of
		Europe till the eleventh century: eight-hundred years
		ago the Norwegians were still worshippers of Odin. It
		is interesting also as the creed of our fathers; the men
		whose blood still runs in our veins, whom doubtless we
		still resemble in so many ways. Strange: they did
		believe that, while we believe so differently. Let us
		look a little at this poor Norse creed, for many reasons.
		We have tolerable means to do it; for there is another
		point of interest in these Scandinavian mythologies:
		that they have been preserved so well.</p>

		<p>In that strange island Iceland,&#8212;burst-up, the
		geologists say, by fire from the bottom of the sea;
		a wild land of barrenness and lava; swallowed many
		months of every year in black tempests, yet with a wild
		gleaming beauty in summer-time; towering up there,
		stern and grim, in the North Ocean; with its snow
		jokuls, roaring geysers, sulphur-pools and horrid volcanic
		chasms, like the waste chaotic battle-field of Frost and
		Fire;&#8212;where of all places we least looked for Literature
		or written memorials, the record of these things
		was written down. On the seaboard of this wild land
		is a rim of grassy country, where cattle can subsist,
		and men by means of them and of what the sea yields;
		and it seems they were poetic men these, men who had
		deep thoughts in them, and uttered musically their
		thoughts. Much would be lost, had Iceland not been
		burst-up from the sea, not been discovered by the
		Northmen! The old Norse Poets were many of them
		natives of Iceland.</p>

		<p>Sæmund, one of the early Christian Priests there,
		who perhaps had a lingering fondness for Paganism,
		collected certain of their old Pagan songs, just about
		becoming obsolete then,&#8212;Poems or Chants of a
		mythic, prophetic, mostly all of a religious character:
		that is what Norse critics call the <i>Elder</i> or Poetic
		<i>Edda</i>. <i>Edda</i>, a word of uncertain etymology, is
		thought to signify <i>Ancestress</i>. Snorro Sturleson, an
		Iceland gentleman, an extremely notable personage,
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page254" name="page254"></a>254</span>educated by this Sæmund&#8217;s grandson, took in hand
		next, near a century afterwards, to put together, among
		several other books he wrote, a kind of Prose Synopsis
		of the whole Mythology; elucidated by new fragments
		of traditionary verse. A work constructed really with
		great ingenuity, native talent, what one might call
		unconscious art; altogether a perspicuous clear work,
		pleasant reading still: this is the <i>Younger</i> or Prose
		<i>Edda</i>. By these and the numerous other <i>Sagas</i>, mostly
		Icelandic, with the commentaries, Icelandic or not,
		which go on zealously in the North to this day, it is
		possible to gain some direct insight even yet; and see
		that old Norse system of Belief, as it were, face to face.
		Let us forget that it is erroneous Religion; let us look
		at it as old Thought, and try if we cannot sympathise
		with it somewhat.</p>

		<p>The primary characteristic of this old Northland
		Mythology I find to be Impersonation of the visible
		workings of Nature. Earnest simple recognition of the
		workings of Physical Nature, as a thing wholly miraculous,
		stupendous and divine. What we now lecture of
		as Science, they wondered at, and fell down in awe
		before, as Religion. The dark hostile powers of Nature
		they figure to themselves as &#8216;<i>Jötuns</i>,&#8217; Giants, huge
		shaggy beings of a demonic character. Frost, Fire,
		Sea-tempest; these are Jötuns. The friendly powers
		again, as Summer-heat, the Sun, are Gods. The empire
		of this Universe is divided between these two; they
		dwell apart, in perennial internecine feud. The Gods
		dwell above in Asgard, the Garden of the Asen, or
		Divinities; Jötunheim, a distant dark chaotic land, is
		the home of the Jötuns.</p>

		<p>Curious all this; and not idle or inane, if we will look
		at the foundation of it! The power of <i>Fire</i>, or <i>Flame</i>,
		for instance, which we designate by some trivial
		chemical name, thereby hiding from ourselves the essential
		character of wonder that dwells in it as in all things,
		is with these old Northmen, Loke, a most swift subtle
		<i>Demon</i>, of the brood of the Jötuns. The savages of the
		Ladrones Islands too (say some Spanish voyagers)
		thought Fire, which they never had seen before, was
		a devil or god, that bit you sharply when you touched
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page255" name="page255"></a>255</span>it, and that lived upon dry wood. From us too no
		Chemistry, if it had not Stupidity to help it, would
		hide that Flame is a wonder. What <em>is</em> Flame?&#8212;<i>Frost</i>
		the old Norse Seer discerns to be a monstrous hoary
		Jötun, the Giant <i>Thrym</i>, <i>Hrym</i>: or <i>Rime</i>, the old word
		now nearly obsolete here, but still used in Scotland
		to signify hoar-frost. <i>Rime</i> was not then as now a
		dead chemical thing, but a living Jötun or Devil; the
		monstrous Jötun <i>Rime</i> drove home his Horses at night,
		sat &#8216;combing their manes,&#8217;&#8212;which Horses were <i>Hail-Clouds</i>,
		or fleet <i>Frost-Winds</i>. His Cows&#8212;No, not his,
		but a kinsman&#8217;s, the Giant Hymir&#8217;s Cows are <i>Icebergs</i>:
		this Hymir &#8216;looks at the rocks&#8217; with his devil-eye, and
		they <em>split</em> in the glance of it.</p>

		<p>Thunder was not then mere Electricity, vitreous or
		resinous; it was the God Donner (Thunder) or Thor,&#8212;God
		also of beneficent Summer-heat. The thunder was
		his wrath; the gathering of the black clouds is the drawing
		down of Thor&#8217;s angry brows; the fire-bolt bursting
		out of Heaven is the all-rending Hammer flung from
		the hand of Thor: he urges his loud chariot over the
		mountain-tops,&#8212;that is the peal: wrathful he &#8216;blows in
		his red beard,&#8217;&#8212;that is the rustling storm-blast before
		the thunder begin. Balder again, the White God, the
		beautiful, the just and benignant (whom the early Christian
		Missionaries found to resemble Christ), is the Sun&#8212;beautifulest
		of visible things; wondrous too, and
		divine still, after all our Astronomies and Almanacs!
		But perhaps the notablest god we hear tell-of is one of
		whom Grimm the German Etymologist finds trace: the
		God <i>Wünsch</i>, or Wish. The God <i>Wish</i>; who could
		give us all that we <em>wished</em>! Is not this the sincerest
		yet rudest voice of the spirit of man? The <em>rudest</em> ideal
		that man ever formed; which still shows itself in the
		latest forms of our spiritual culture. Higher considerations
		have to teach us that the God <i>Wish</i> is not the true
		God.</p>

		<p>Of the other Gods or Jötuns I will mention only for
		etymology&#8217;s sake, that Sea-tempest is the Jötun <i>Aegir</i>,
		a very dangerous Jötun;&#8212;and now to this day, on our
		river Trent, as I learn, the Nottingham bargemen, when
		the River is in a certain flooded state (a kind of back-water,
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page256" name="page256"></a>256</span>or eddying swirl it has, very dangerous to them),
		call it <i>Eager</i>; they cry out, &#8220;Have a care, there is the
		<i>Eager</i> coming!&#8221; Curious; that word surviving, like
		the peak of a submerged world! The <em>oldest</em> Nottingham
		bargemen had believed in the God Aegir. Indeed,
		our English blood too in good part is Danish, Norse;
		or rather, at bottom, Danish and Norse and Saxon
		have no distinction, except a superficial one,&#8212;as of
		Heathen and Christian, or the like. But all over our
		Island we are mingled largely with Danes proper,&#8212;from
		the incessant invasions there were: and this, of
		course, in a greater proportion along the east coast;
		and greatest of all, as I find, in the North Country.
		From the Humber upwards, all over Scotland, the
		Speech of the common people is still in a singular degree
		Icelandic; its Germanism has still a peculiar Norse
		tinge. They too are &#8216;Normans,&#8217; Northmen,&#8212;if that
		be any great beauty!&#8212;</p>

		<p>Of the chief god, Odin, we shall speak by and by.
		Mark at present so much; what the essence of Scandinavian
		and indeed of all Paganism is: a recognition
		of the forces of Nature as godlike, stupendous, personal
		Agencies,&#8212;as Gods and Demons. Not inconceivable
		to us. It is the infant Thought of man opening itself,
		with awe and wonder, on this ever-stupendous Universe.
		To me there is in the Norse System something very
		genuine, very great and manlike. A broad simplicity,
		rusticity, so very different from the light gracefulness
		of the old Greek Paganism, distinguishes this Scandinavian
		System. It is Thought; the genuine Thought
		of deep, rude, earnest minds, fairly opened to the things
		about them; a face-to-face and heart-to-heart inspection
		of the things,&#8212;the first characteristic of all good
		Thought in all times. Not graceful lightness, half-sport,
		as in the Greek Paganism; a certain homely
		truthfulness and rustic strength, a great rude sincerity,
		discloses itself here. It is strange, after our beautiful
		Apollo statues and clear smiling mythuses, to come
		down upon the Norse Gods &#8216;brewing ale&#8217; to hold their
		feast with Aegir, the Sea-Jötun; sending out Thor to
		get the caldron for them in the Jötun country; Thor,
		after many adventures, clapping the Pot on his head,
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page257" name="page257"></a>257</span>like a huge hat, and walking off with it,&#8212;quite lost in
		it, the ears of the Pot reaching down to his heels! A
		kind of vacant hugeness, large awkward gianthood,
		characterises that Norse System; enormous force, as
		yet altogether untutored, stalking helpless with large
		uncertain strides. Consider only their primary mythus
		of the Creation. The Gods, having got the Giant Ymer
		slain, a Giant made by &#8216;warm wind,&#8217; and much confused
		work, out of the conflict of Frost and Fire,&#8212;determined
		on constructing a world with him. His
		blood made the sea; his flesh was the Land, the Rocks
		his bones; of his eyebrows they formed Asgard their
		Gods&#8217;-dwelling; his skull was the great blue vault of
		Immensity, and the brains of it became the Clouds.
		What a Hyper-Brobdignagian business! Untamed
		Thought, great, giantlike, enormous;&#8212;to be tamed in
		due time into the compact greatness, not giant-like, but
		godlike and stronger than gianthood, of the Shakspeares,
		the Goethes!&#8212;Spiritually as well as bodily
		these men are our progenitors.</p>

		<p>I like, too, that representation they have of the Tree
		Igdrasil. All Life is figured by them as a Tree.
		Igdrasil, the Ash-tree of Existence, has its roots deep-down
		in the kingdoms of Hela or Death; its trunk
		reaches up heaven-high, spreads its boughs over the
		whole Universe: it is the Tree of Existence. At the
		foot of it, in the Death-kingdom, sit three <i>Nornas</i>,
		Fates,&#8212;the Past, Present, Future; watering its roots
		from the Sacred Well. Its &#8216;boughs,&#8217; with their buddings
		and disleafings,&#8212;events, things suffered, things
		done, catastrophes,&#8212;stretch through all lands and
		times. Is not every leaf of it a biography, every fibre
		there an act or word? Its boughs are Histories of
		Nations. The rustle of it is the noise of Human Existence,
		onwards from of old. It grows there, the breath
		of Human Passion rustling through it;&#8212;or stormtost,
		the stormwind howling through it like the voice of all
		the gods. It is Igdrasil, the Tree of Existence. It
		is the past, the present, and the future; what was
		done, what is doing, what will be done; &#8216;the infinite
		conjugation of the verb <i>To do</i>.&#8217; Considering how
		human things circulate, each inextricably in communion
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page258" name="page258"></a>258</span>with all,&#8212;how the word I speak to you to-day is
		borrowed, not from Ulfila the Mœsogoth only, but from
		all men since the first man began to speak,&#8212;I find no
		similitude so true as this of a Tree. Beautiful; altogether
		beautiful and great. The &#8216;<i>Machine</i> of the
		Universe,&#8217;&#8212;alas, do but think of that in contrast!</p>

		<p class="post_thoughtbreak">Well, it is strange enough this old Norse view of
		Nature; different enough from what we believe of
		Nature. Whence it specially came, one would not like
		to be compelled to say very minutely! One thing we
		may say: It came from the thoughts of Norse men;&#8212;from
		the thought, above all, of the <em>first</em> Norse man
		who had an original power of thinking. The First
		Norse &#8216;man of genius,&#8217; as we should call him! Innumerable
		men had passed by, across this Universe,
		with a dumb vague wonder, such as the very animals
		may feel; or with a painful, fruitlessly inquiring
		wonder, such as men only feel;&#8212;till the great Thinker
		came, the <em>original</em> man, the Seer; whose shaped spoken
		Thought awakes the slumbering capability of all into
		Thought. It is ever the way with the Thinker, the
		spiritual Hero. What he says, all men were not far
		from saying, were longing to say. The Thoughts of all
		start up, as from painful enchanted sleep, round his
		Thought; answering to it, Yes, even so! Joyful to
		men as the dawning of day from night; <em>is</em> it not, indeed,
		the awakening for them from no-being into being, from
		death into life? We still honour such a man; call him
		Poet, Genius, and so forth: but to these wild men he
		was a very magician, a worker of miraculous unexpected
		blessing for them; a Prophet, a God!&#8212;Thought once
		awakened does not again slumber; unfolds itself into a
		System of Thought; grows, in man after man, generation
		after generation,&#8212;till its full stature is reached,
		and <em>such</em> System of Thought can grow no farther, but
		must give place to another.</p>

		<p>For the Norse people, the Man now named Odin, and
		Chief Norse God, we fancy, was such a man. A Teacher,
		and Captain of soul and of body; a Hero, of worth
		<em>im</em>measurable; admiration for whom, transcending the
		known bounds, became adoration. Has he not the
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page259" name="page259"></a>259</span>power of articulate Thinking; and many other powers,
		as yet miraculous? So, with boundless gratitude,
		would the rude Norse heart feel. Has he not solved
		for them the sphinx-enigma of this Universe; given
		assurance to them of their own destiny there? By him
		they know now what they have to do here, what to look
		for hereafter. Existence has become articulate, melodious
		by him; he first has made Life alive!&#8212;We may
		call this Odin, the origin of Norse Mythology: Odin,
		or whatever name the First Norse Thinker bore while
		he was a man among men. His view of the Universe
		once promulgated, a like view starts into being in all
		minds; grows, keeps ever growing, while it continues
		credible there. In all minds it lay written, but invisibly,
		as in sympathetic ink; at his word it starts into visibility
		in all. Nay, in every epoch of the world, the great
		event, parent of all others, is it not the arrival of a
		Thinker in the world!&#8212;</p>

		<p>One other thing we must not forget; it will explain,
		a little, the confusion of these Norse Eddas. They are
		not one coherent System of Thought; but properly the
		<em>summation</em> of several successive systems. All this of the
		old Norse Belief which is flung-out for us, in one level
		of distance in the Edda, like a picture painted on the
		same canvas, does not at all stand so in the reality. It
		stands rather at all manner of distances and depths, of
		successive generations since the Belief first began. All
		Scandinavian thinkers, since the first of them, contributed
		to the Scandinavian System of Thought; in ever-new
		elaboration and addition, it is the combined work
		of them all. What history it had, how it changed from
		shape to shape, by one thinker&#8217;s contribution after
		another, till it got to the full final shape we see it under
		in the <i>Edda</i>, no man will now ever know: <em>its</em> Councils
		of Trebisond, Councils of Trent, Athanasiuses, Dantes,
		Luthers, are sunk without echo in the dark night!
		Only that it had such a history we can all know.
		Wheresoever a thinker appeared, there in the thing he
		thought-of was a contribution, accession, a change or
		revolution made. Alas, the grandest &#8216;revolution&#8217; of
		all, the one made by the man Odin himself, is not this
		too sunk for us like the rest! Of Odin what history?
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page260" name="page260"></a>260</span>Strange rather to reflect that he <em>had</em> a history! That
		this Odin, in his wild Norse vesture, with his wild beard
		and eyes, his rude Norse speech and ways, was a man
		like us; with our sorrows, joys, with our limbs,
		features;&#8212;intrinsically all one as we: and did such
		a work! But the work, much of it, has perished; the
		worker, all to the name. &#8220;<i>Wednes</i>day,&#8221; men will say
		to-morrow; Odin&#8217;s day! Of Odin there exists no
		history; no document of it; no guess about it worth
		repeating.</p>

		<p>Snorro indeed, in the quietest manner, almost in a
		brief business style, writes down, in his <i>Heimskringla</i>,
		how Odin was a heroic Prince, in the Black-Sea region,
		with Twelve Peers, and a great people straitened for
		room. How he led these <i>Asen</i> (Asiatics) of his out of
		Asia; settled them in the North parts of Europe, by
		warlike conquest; invented Letters, Poetry and so
		forth,&#8212;and came by and by to be worshipped as Chief
		God by these Scandinavians, his Twelve Peers made into
		Twelve Sons of his own, Gods like himself: Snorro has
		no doubt of this. Saxo Grammaticus, a very curious
		Northman of that same century, is still more unhesitating;
		scruples not to find out a historical fact in every
		individual mythus, and writes it down as a terrestrial
		event in Denmark or elsewhere. Torfæus, learned and
		cautious, some centuries later, assigns by calculation
		a <em>date</em> for it: Odin, he says, came into Europe about
		the Year 70 before Christ. Of all which, as grounded
		on mere uncertainties, found to be untenable now, I
		need say nothing. Far, very far beyond the Year 70!
		Odin&#8217;s date, adventures, whole terrestrial history,
		figure and environment are sunk from us forever into
		unknown thousands of years.</p>

		<p>Nay Grimm, the German Antiquary, goes so far as
		to deny that any man Odin ever existed. He proves it
		by etymology. The word <i>Wuotan</i>, which is the original
		form of <i>Odin</i>, a word spread, as name of their chief
		Divinity, over all the Teutonic Nations everywhere; this
		word, which connects itself, according to Grimm, with
		the Latin <i>vadere</i>, with the English <i>wade</i> and suchlike,&#8212;means
		primarily <i>Movement</i>, Source of Movement,
		Power; and is the fit name of the highest god, not of
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page261" name="page261"></a>261</span>any man. The word signifies Divinity, he says, among
		the old Saxon, German and all Teutonic Nations; the
		adjectives formed from it all signify <em>divine</em>, <em>supreme</em>,
		or something pertaining to the chief god. Like enough!
		We must bow to Grimm in matters etymological. Let
		us consider it fixed that <i>Wuotan</i> means <i>Wading</i>, force
		of <i>Movement</i>. And now still, what hinders it from
		being the name of a Heroic Man and <i>Mover</i>, as well
		as of a god? As for the adjectives, and words formed
		from it,&#8212;did not the Spaniards in their universal
		admiration for Lope, get into the habit of saying &#8216;a
		Lope flower,&#8217; a &#8216;Lope <i>dama</i>,&#8217; if the flower or woman
		were of surpassing beauty? Had this lasted, <i>Lope</i>
		would have grown, in Spain, to be an adjective signifying
		<em>godlike</em> also. Indeed, Adam Smith, in his <i>Essay
		on Language</i>, surmises that all adjectives whatsoever
		were formed precisely in that way: some very green
		thing chiefly notable for its greenness, got the appellative
		name <i>Green</i>, and then the next thing remarkable
		for that quality, a tree for instance, was named the
		<em>green</em> tree,&#8212;as we still say &#8216;the <em>steam coach</em>,&#8217; &#8216;four-horse
		coach,&#8217; or the like. All primary adjectives,
		according to Smith, were formed in this way; were at
		first substantives and things. We cannot annihilate a
		man for etymologies like that! Surely there was a
		First Teacher and Captain; surely there must have been
		an Odin, palpable to the sense at one time; no adjective,
		but a real Hero of flesh and blood! The voice
		of all tradition, history or echo of history, agrees with
		all that thought will teach one about it, to assure us
		of this.</p>

		<p>How the man Odin came to be considered a <em>god</em>, the
		chief god?&#8212;that surely is a question which nobody
		would wish to dogmatise upon. I have said, his people
		knew no <em>limits</em> to their admiration of him; they had as
		yet no scale to measure admiration by. Fancy your
		own generous heart&#8217;s-love of some greatest man expanding
		till it <em>transcended</em> all bounds, till it filled and
		overflowed the whole field of your thought! Or what
		if this man Odin,&#8212;since a great deep soul, with the
		afflatus and mysterious tide of vision and impulse rushing
		on him he knows not whence, is ever an enigma,
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page262" name="page262"></a>262</span>a kind of terror and wonder to himself,&#8212;should have
		felt that perhaps <em>he</em> was divine; that <em>he</em> was some
		effluence of the &#8216;Wuotan,&#8217; &#8216;<i>Movement</i>,&#8217; Supreme Power
		and Divinity, of whom to his rapt vision all Nature was
		the awful Flame-image; that some effluence of <i>Wuotan</i>
		dwelt here in him! He was not necessarily false; he
		was but mistaken, speaking the truest he knew. A
		great soul, any sincere soul, knows not <em>what</em> he is,&#8212;alternates
		between the highest height and the lowest
		depth; can, of all things, the least measure&#8212;Himself!
		What others take him for, and what he guesses that he
		may be; these two items strangely act on one another,
		help to determine one another. With all men reverently
		admiring him; with his own wild soul full of noble
		ardours and affections, of whirlwind chaotic darkness
		and glorious new light; a divine Universe bursting all
		into godlike beauty round him, and no man to whom
		the like ever had befallen, what could he think himself
		to be? &#8220;Wuotan?&#8221; All men answered, &#8220;Wuotan!&#8221;&#8212;</p>

		<p>And then consider what mere Time will do in such
		cases; how if a man was great while living, he becomes
		tenfold greater when dead. What an enormous <i>camera-obscura</i>
		magnifier is Tradition! How a thing grows
		in the human Memory, in the human Imagination, when
		love, worship and all that lies in the human Heart, is
		there to encourage it. And in the darkness, in the
		entire ignorance; without date or document, no book,
		no Arundel-marble; only here and there some dumb
		monumental cairn. Why, in thirty or forty years, were
		there no books, any great man would grow <em>mythic</em>, the
		contemporaries who had once seen him, being all dead.
		And in three-hundred years, and three-thousand years&#8212;!&#8212;To
		attempt <em>theorising</em> on such matters would profit
		little: they are matters which refuse to be <em>theoremed</em>
		and diagramed; which Logic ought to know that she
		<em>cannot</em> speak of. Enough for us to discern, far in
		the uttermost distance, some gleam as of a small real
		light shining in the centre of that enormous camera-obscura
		image; to discern that the centre of it all was
		not a madness and nothing, but a sanity and something.</p>

		<p>This light, kindled in the great dark vortex of the
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page263" name="page263"></a>263</span>Norse mind, dark but living, waiting only for light;
		this is to me the centre of the whole. How such light
		will then shine out, and with wondrous thousandfold
		expansion spread itself, in forms and colours, depends
		not on <em>it</em>, so much as on the National Mind recipient of
		it. The colours and forms of your light will be those
		of the <em>cut-glass</em> it has to shine through.&#8212;Curious to
		think how, for every man, any the truest fact is modelled
		by the nature of the man! I said, The earnest man,
		speaking to his brother men, must always have stated
		what seemed to him a <em>fact</em>, a real Appearance of Nature.
		But the way in which such Appearance or fact shaped
		itself,&#8212;what sort of <em>fact</em> it became for him,&#8212;was and is
		modified by his own laws of thinking; deep, subtle, but
		universal, ever-operating laws. The world of Nature,
		for every man, is the Phantasy of Himself; this world
		is the multiplex &#8216;Image of his own Dream.&#8217; Who
		knows to what unnameable subtleties of spiritual law all
		these Pagan Fables owe their shape! The number
		<i>Twelve</i>, divisiblest of all, which could be halved,
		quartered, parted into three, into six, the most remarkable
		number,&#8212;this was enough to determine the <i>Signs
		of the Zodiac</i>, the number of Odin&#8217;s <i>Sons</i>, and innumerable
		other Twelves. Any vague rumour of number had
		a tendency to settle itself into Twelve. So with regard
		to every other matter. And quite unconsciously too,&#8212;with
		no notion of building-up &#8216;Allegories&#8217;! But the
		fresh clear glance of those First Ages would be prompt
		in discerning the secret relations of things, and wholly
		open to obey these. Schiller finds in the <i>Cestus of
		Venus</i> an everlasting æsthetic truth as to the nature of
		all Beauty; curious:&#8212;but he is careful not to insinuate
		that the old Greek Mythists had any notion of lecturing
		about the &#8216;Philosophy of Criticism&#8217;!&#8212;&#8212;On the whole
		we must leave those boundless regions. Cannot we conceive
		that Odin was a reality? Error indeed, error
		enough: but sheer falsehood, idle fables, allegory aforethought,&#8212;we
		will not believe that our Fathers believed
		in these.</p>

		<p class="post_thoughtbreak">Odin&#8217;s <i>Runes</i> are a significant feature of him. Runes,
		and the miracles of &#8216;magic&#8217; he worked by them, make
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page264" name="page264"></a>264</span>a great feature in tradition. Runes are the Scandinavian
		Alphabet; suppose Odin to have been the inventor
		of Letters, as well as &#8216;magic,&#8217; among that people! It
		is the greatest invention man has ever made, this of
		marking down the unseen thought that is in him by
		written characters. It is a kind of second speech,
		almost as miraculous as the first. You remember the
		astonishment and incredulity of Atahualpa the Peruvian
		King; how he made the Spanish Soldier who was guarding
		him scratch <i>Dios</i> on his thumb-nail, that he might
		try the next soldier with it, to ascertain whether such
		a miracle was possible. If Odin brought Letters among
		his people, he might work magic enough!</p>

		<p>Writing by Runes has some air of being original
		among the Norsemen: not a Phœnician Alphabet, but
		a native Scandinavian one. Snorro tells us farther that
		Odin invented Poetry; the music of human speech, as
		well as that miraculous runic marking of it. Transport
		yourselves into the early childhood of nations; the first
		beautiful morning-light of our Europe, when all yet lay
		in fresh young radiance as of a great sunrise, and our
		Europe was first beginning to think, to be! Wonder,
		hope; infinite radiance of hope and wonder, as of a
		young child&#8217;s thoughts, in the hearts of these strong
		men! Strong sons of Nature; and here was not only
		a wild Captain and Fighter; discerning with his wild
		flashing eyes what to do, with his wild lion-heart daring
		and doing it; but a Poet too, all that we mean by a
		Poet, Prophet, great devout Thinker and Inventor,&#8212;as
		the truly Great Man ever is. A Hero is a Hero
		at all points; in the soul and thought of him first of all.
		This Odin, in his rude semi-articulate way, had a word
		to speak. A great heart laid open to take in this great
		Universe, and man&#8217;s Life here, and utter a great word
		about it. A Hero, as I say, in his own rude manner;
		a wise, gifted, noble-hearted man. And now, if we still
		admire such a man beyond all others, what must these
		wild Norse souls, first awakened into thinking, have
		made of him! To them, as yet without names for it,
		he was noble and noblest; Hero, Prophet, God;
		<i>Wuotan</i>, the greatest of all. Thought is Thought,
		however it speak or spell itself. Intrinsically, I conjecture,
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page265" name="page265"></a>265</span>this Odin must have been of the same sort of
		stuff as the greatest kind of men. A great thought in
		the wild deep heart of him! The rough words he
		articulated, are they not the rudimental roots of those
		English words we still use? He worked so, in that
		obscure element. But he was as a <em>light</em> kindled in it;
		a light of Intellect, rude Nobleness of heart, the only
		kind of lights we have yet; a Hero, as I say: and he
		had to shine there, and make his obscure element a
		little lighter,&#8212;as is still the task of us all.</p>

		<p>We will fancy him to be the Type Norseman; the
		finest Teuton whom that race had yet produced. The
		rude Norse heart burst-up into <em>boundless</em> admiration
		round him; into adoration. He is as a root of so many
		great things; the fruit of him is found growing, from
		deep thousands of years, over the whole field of Teutonic
		Life. Our own Wednesday, as I said, is it not still
		Odin&#8217;s Day? Wednesbury, Wansborough, Wanstead,
		Wandsworth: Odin grew into England too, these are
		still leaves from that root! He was the Chief God to
		all the Teutonic Peoples; their Pattern Norseman;&#8212;in
		such way did <em>they</em> admire their Pattern Norseman; that
		was the fortune he had in the world.</p>

		<p>Thus if the man Odin himself have vanished utterly,
		there is this huge Shadow of him which still projects
		itself over the whole History of his People. For this
		Odin once admitted to be God, we can understand well
		that the whole Scandinavian Scheme of Nature, or dim
		No-scheme, whatever it might before have been, would
		now begin to develop itself altogether differently, and
		grow thenceforth in a new manner. What this Odin
		saw into, and taught with his runes and his rhymes,
		the whole Teutonic People laid to heart and carried
		forward. His way of thought became their way of
		thought:&#8212;such, under new conditions, is the history of
		every great thinker still. In gigantic confused lineaments,
		like some enormous camera-obscura shadow
		thrown upwards from the dead deeps of the Past, and
		covering the whole Northern Heaven, is not that Scandinavian
		Mythology in some sort the Portraiture of
		this man Odin? The gigantic image of <em>his</em> natural
		face, legible or not legible there, expanded and confused
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page266" name="page266"></a>266</span>in that manner! Ah, Thought, I say, is always
		Thought. No great man lives in vain. The History of
		the world is but the Biography of great men.</p>

		<p>To me there is something very touching in this
		primeval figure of Heroism; in such artless, helpless,
		but hearty entire reception of a Hero by his fellow-men.
		Never so helpless in shape, it is the noblest of feelings,
		and a feeling in some shape or other perennial as man
		himself. If I could show in any measure, what I feel
		deeply for a long time now, That it is the vital element
		of manhood, the soul of man&#8217;s history here in our
		world,&#8212;it would be the chief use of this discoursing
		at present. We do not now call our great men Gods,
		nor admire <em>without</em> limit; ah, no, <em>with</em> limit enough!
		But if we have no great men, or do not admire at all,&#8212;that
		were a still worse case.</p>

		<p>This poor Scandinavian Hero-worship, that whole
		Norse way of looking at the Universe, and adjusting
		oneself there, has an indestructible merit for us. A
		rude childlike way of recognising the divineness of
		Nature, the divineness of Man; most rude, yet heartfelt,
		robust, giantlike; betokening what a giant of a
		man this child would grow to!&#8212;It was a truth, and
		is none. Is it not as the half-dumb stifled voice of the
		long-buried generations of our own Fathers, calling out
		of the depths of ages to us, in whose veins their blood
		still runs: &#8220;This then, this is what <em>we</em> made of the
		world: this is all the image and notion we could form
		to ourselves of this great mystery of a Life and Universe.
		Despise it not. You are raised high above it, to large
		free scope of vision; but you too are not yet at the top.
		No, your notion too, so much enlarged, is but a partial,
		imperfect one: that matter is a thing no man will ever,
		in time or out of time, comprehend; after thousands
		of years of ever-new expansion, man will find himself
		but struggling to comprehend again a part of it: the
		thing is larger than man, not to be comprehended by
		him; an Infinite thing!&#8221;</p>

		<p class="post_thoughtbreak">The essence of the Scandinavian, as indeed of all
		Pagan Mythologies, we found to be recognition of the
		divineness of Nature; sincere communion of man with
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page267" name="page267"></a>267</span>the mysterious invisible Powers visibly seen at work
		in the world round him. This, I should say, is more
		sincerely done in the Scandinavian than in any Mythology
		I know. Sincerity is the great characteristic
		of it. Superior sincerity (far superior) consoles us for
		the total want of old Grecian grace. Sincerity, I think,
		is better than grace. I feel that these old Northmen
		were looking into Nature with open eye and soul: most
		earnest, honest; childlike, and yet manlike; with a
		great-hearted simplicity and depth and freshness, in a
		true, loving, admiring, unfearing way. A right valiant,
		true old race of men. Such recognition of Nature one
		finds to be the chief element of Paganism: recognition
		of Man, and his Moral Duty, though this too is not
		wanting, comes to be the chief element only in purer
		forms of religion. Here, indeed, is a great distinction
		and epoch in Human Beliefs; a great landmark in the
		religious development of Mankind. Man first puts himself
		in relation with Nature and her Powers, wonders
		and worships over those; not till a later epoch does
		he discern that all Power is Moral, that the grand point
		is the distinction for him of Good and Evil, of <i>Thou
		shalt</i> and <i>Thou shalt not</i>.</p>

		<p>With regard to all these fabulous delineations in the
		<i>Edda</i>, I will remark, moreover, as indeed was already
		hinted, that most probably they must have been of much
		newer date; most probably, even from the first, were
		comparatively idle for the old Norsemen, and as it were
		a kind of Poetic sport. Allegory and Poetic Delineation,
		as I said above, cannot be religious Faith; the
		Faith itself must first be there, then Allegory enough
		will gather round it, as the fit body round its soul.
		The Norse Faith, I can well suppose, like other Faiths,
		was most active while it lay mainly in the silent state,
		and had not yet much to say about itself, still less to
		sing.</p>

		<p>Among those shadowy <i>Edda</i> matters, amid all that
		fantastic congeries of assertions, and traditions, in their
		musical Mythologies, the main practical belief a man
		could have was probably not much more than this: of
		the <i>Valkyrs</i> and the <i>Hall of Odin</i>; of an inflexible
		<i>Destiny</i>; and that the one thing needful for a man
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page268" name="page268"></a>268</span>was <em>to be brave</em>. The <i>Valkyrs</i> are Choosers of the
		Slain: a Destiny inexorable, which it is useless trying
		to bend or soften, has appointed who is to be slain; this
		was a fundamental point for the Norse believer;&#8212;as
		indeed it is for all earnest men everywhere, for a Mahomet,
		a Luther, for a Napoleon too. It lies at the basis
		this for every such man; it is the woof out of which
		his whole system of thought is woven. The <i>Valkyrs</i>;
		and then that these <i>Choosers</i> lead the brave to a heavenly
		<i>Hall of Odin</i>; only the base and slavish being thrust
		elsewhither, into the realms of Hela the Death-goddess:
		I take this to have been the soul of the whole Norse
		Belief. They understood in their heart that it was
		indispensable to be brave; that Odin would have no
		favour for them, but despise and thrust them out, if they
		were not brave. Consider too whether there is not
		something in this! It is an everlasting duty, valid in
		our day as in that, the duty of being brave. <i>Valour</i>
		is still <em>value</em>. The first duty of a man is still that of
		subduing <i>Fear</i>. We must get rid of Fear; we cannot
		act at all till then. A man&#8217;s acts are slavish, not true
		but specious: his very thoughts are false, he thinks
		too as a slave and coward, till he have got Fear under
		his feet. Odin&#8217;s creed, if we disentangle the real kernel
		of it, is true to this hour. A man shall and must be
		valiant; he must march forward, and quit himself like
		a man&#8212;trusting imperturbably in the appointment and
		<em>choice</em> of the upper Powers; and, on the whole, not fear
		at all. Now and always, the completeness of his victory
		over Fear will determine how much of a man he is.</p>

		<p>It is doubtless very savage that kind of valour of the
		old Northmen. Snorro tells us they thought it a shame
		and misery not to die in battle; and if natural death
		seemed to be coming on, they would cut wounds in
		their flesh, that Odin might receive them as warriors
		slain. Old kings, about to die, had their body laid
		into a ship; the ship sent forth, with sails set and slow
		fire burning it; that, once out at sea, it might blaze-up
		in flame, and in such manner bury worthily the old
		hero, at once in the sky and in the ocean! Wild bloody
		valour; yet valour of its kind; better, I say, than none.
		In the old Sea-kings too, what an indomitable rugged
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page269" name="page269"></a>269</span>energy! Silent, with closed lips, as I fancy them,
		unconscious that they were specially brave; defying
		the wild ocean with its monsters, and all men and
		things;&#8212;progenitors of our own Blakes and Nelsons!
		No Homer sang these Norse Sea-kings; but Agamemnon&#8217;s
		was a small audacity, and of small fruit in the
		world, to some of them;&#8212;to Hrolf&#8217;s of Normandy, for
		instance! Hrolf, or Rollo Duke of Normandy, the wild
		Sea-king, has a share in governing England at this
		hour.</p>

		<p>Nor was it altogether nothing, even that wild sea-roving
		and battling, through so many generations. It
		needed to be ascertained which was the <em>strongest</em> kind
		of men; who were to be ruler over whom. Among
		the Northland Sovereigns, too, I find some who got the
		title <i>Wood-cutter</i>; Forest-felling Kings. Much lies in
		that. I suppose at bottom many of them were forest-fellers
		as well as fighters, though the Skalds talk mainly
		of the latter,&#8212;misleading certain critics not a little; for
		no nation of men could ever live by fighting alone; there
		could not produce enough come out of that! I suppose
		the right good fighter was oftenest also the right good
		forest-feller,&#8212;the right good improver, discerner, doer
		and worker in every kind; for true valour, different
		enough from ferocity, is the basis of all. A more
		legitimate kind of valour that; showing itself against
		the untamed Forests and dark brute Powers of Nature,
		to conquer Nature for us. In the same direction have
		not we their descendants since carried it far? May
		such valour last forever with us!</p>

		<p>That the man Odin, speaking with a Hero&#8217;s voice
		and heart, as with an impressiveness out of Heaven, told
		his People the infinite importance of Valour, how man
		thereby became a god; and that his People, feeling
		a response to it in their own hearts, believed this
		message of his, and thought it a message out of Heaven,
		and him a Divinity for telling it them: this seems to
		me the primary seed-grain of the Norse Religion, from
		which all manner of mythologies, symbolic practices,
		speculations, allegories, songs and sagas would naturally
		grow. Grow,&#8212;how strangely! I called it a small
		light shining and shaping in the huge vortex of Norse
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page270" name="page270"></a>270</span>darkness. Yet the darkness itself was <em>alive</em>; consider
		that. It was the eager inarticulate uninstructed Mind
		of the whole Norse People, longing only to become
		articulate, to go on articulating ever farther! The
		living doctrine grows, grows;&#8212;like a Banyan-tree; the
		first <em>seed</em> is the essential thing: any branch strikes itself
		down into the earth, becomes a new root; and so, in
		endless complexity, we have a whole wood, a whole
		jungle, one seed the parent of it all. Was not the whole
		Norse Religion, accordingly, in some sense, what we
		called &#8216;the enormous shadow of this man&#8217;s likeness&#8217;?
		Critics trace some affinity in some Norse mythuses, of
		the Creation and suchlike, with those of the Hindoos.
		The Cow Adumbla, &#8216;licking the rime from the rocks,&#8217;
		has a kind of Hindoo look. A Hindoo Cow, transported
		into frosty countries. Probably enough; indeed we
		may say undoubtedly, these things will have a kindred
		with the remotest lands, with the earliest times.
		Thought does not die, but only is changed. The first
		man that began to think in this Planet of ours, he was
		the beginner of all. And then the second man, and
		the third man:&#8212;nay, every true Thinker to this hour
		is a kind of Odin, teaches men <em>his</em> way of thought,
		spreads a shadow of his own likeness over sections of
		the History of the World.</p>

		<p class="post_thoughtbreak">Of the distinctive poetic character or merit of this
		Norse Mythology I have not room to speak; nor does
		it concern us much. Some wild Prophecies we have,
		as the <i>Völuspa</i> in the <i>Elder Edda</i>; of a rapt, earnest,
		sibylline sort. But they were comparatively an idle
		adjunct of the matter, men who as it were but toyed
		with the matter, these later Skalds; and it is <em>their</em> songs
		chiefly that survive. In later centuries, I suppose, they
		would go on singing, poetically symbolising, as our
		modern Painters paint, when it was no longer from the
		innermost heart, or not from the heart at all. This is
		everywhere to be well kept in mind.</p>

		<p>Gray&#8217;s fragments of Norse Lore, at any rate, will
		give one no notion of it;&#8212;any more than Pope will of
		Homer. It is no square-built gloomy palace of black
		ashlar marble, shrouded in awe and horror, as Gray
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page271" name="page271"></a>271</span>gives it us: no; rough as the North Rocks, as the
		Iceland deserts, it is; with a heartiness, homeliness,
		even a tint of good humour and robust mirth in the
		middle of these fearful things. The strong old Norse
		heart did not go upon theatrical sublimities; they had
		not time to tremble. I like much their robust simplicity;
		their veracity, directness of conception. Thor &#8216;draws
		down his brows&#8217; in a veritable Norse rage; &#8216;grasps his
		hammer till the <em>knuckles grow white</em>.&#8217; Beautiful traits
		of pity too, an honest pity. Balder &#8216;the white God&#8217;
		dies; the beautiful, benignant; he is the Sungod.
		They try all Nature for a remedy; but he is dead.
		Frigga, his mother, sends Hermoder to seek or see
		him: nine days and nine nights he rides through gloomy
		deep valleys, a labyrinth of gloom; arrives at the
		Bridge with its gold roof: the Keeper says, &#8220;Yes,
		Balder did pass here; but the Kingdom of the Dead
		is down yonder, far towards the North.&#8221; Hermoder
		rides on; leaps Hell-gate, Hela&#8217;s gate: does see Balder,
		and speak with him: Balder cannot be delivered. Inexorable!
		Hela will not, for Odin or any God, give him
		up. The beautiful and gentle has to remain there. His
		Wife had volunteered to go with him, to die with him.
		They shall forever remain there. He sends his ring to
		Odin; Nanna his wife sends her <em>thimble</em> to Frigga, as
		a remembrance&#8212;Ah me!&#8212;</p>

		<p>For indeed Valour is the fountain of Pity too;&#8212;of
		Truth, and all that is great and good in man. The
		robust homely vigour of the Norse heart attaches one
		much, in these delineations. Is it not a trait of right
		honest strength, says Uhland, who has written a fine
		<i>Essay</i> on Thor, that the Old Norse heart finds its friend
		in the Thunder-god? That it is not frightened away by
		his thunder; but finds that Summer-heat, the beautiful
		noble summer, must and will have thunder withal! The
		Norse heart <em>loves</em> this Thor and his hammer-bolt; sports
		with him. Thor is Summer-heat; the god of Peaceable
		Industry as well as Thunder. He is the Peasant&#8217;s
		friend; his true henchman and attendant is Thialfi,
		<i>Manual Labour</i>. Thor himself engages in all manner
		of rough manual work, scorns no business for its
		plebeianism; is ever and anon travelling to the country
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page272" name="page272"></a>272</span>of the Jötuns, harrying those chaotic Frost-monsters,
		subduing them, at least straitening and damaging them.
		There is a great broad humour in some of these things.</p>

		<p>Thor, as we saw above, goes to Jötun-land, to seek
		Hymir&#8217;s Caldron, that the Gods may brew beer. Hymir
		the huge Giant enters, his grey beard all full of hoar-frost;
		splits pillars with the very glance of his eye;
		Thor, after much rough tumult, snatches the Pot, claps
		it on his head; the &#8216;handles of it reach down to his
		heels.&#8217; The Norse Skald has a kind of loving sport
		with Thor. This is the Hymir whose cattle, the critics
		have discovered, are Icebergs. Huge untutored Brobdignag
		genius,&#8212;needing only to be tamed-down; into
		Shakspeares, Dantes, Goethes! It is all gone now,
		that old Norse work,&#8212;Thor the Thunder-god changed
		into Jack the Giant-killer: but the mind that made it
		is here yet. How strangely things grow, and die, and
		do not die! There are twigs of that great world-tree
		of Norse Belief still curiously traceable. This poor
		Jack of the Nursery, with his miraculous shoes of swiftness,
		coat of darkness, sword of sharpness, he is one.
		<i>Hynde Etin</i>, and still more decisively <i>Red Etin of
		Ireland</i>, in the Scottish Ballads, these are both derived
		from Norseland; <i>Etin</i> is evidently a <i>Jötun</i>. Nay,
		Shakspeare&#8217;s <i>Hamlet</i> is a twig too of this same world-tree;
		there seems no doubt of that. Hamlet, <i>Amleth</i>,
		I find, is really a mythic personage; and his Tragedy,
		of the poisoned Father, poisoned asleep by drops in his
		ear, and the rest, is a Norse mythus! Old Saxo, as
		his wont was, made it a Danish history; Shakspeare,
		out of Saxo, made it what we see. That is a twig of
		the world-tree that has <em>grown</em>, I think;&#8212;by nature or
		accident that one has grown!</p>

		<p>In fact, these old Norse songs have a <em>truth</em> in them,
		an inward perennial truth and greatness,&#8212;as, indeed,
		all must have that can very long preserve itself by
		tradition alone. It is a greatness not of mere body and
		gigantic bulk, but a rude greatness of soul. There is
		a sublime uncomplaining melancholy traceable in these
		old hearts. A great free glance into the very deeps of
		thought. They seem to have seen, these brave old
		Northmen, what Meditation has taught all men in all
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page273" name="page273"></a>273</span>ages, That this world is after all but a show,&#8212;a phenomenon
		or appearance, no real thing. All deep souls see
		into that,&#8212;the Hindoo Mythologist, the German Philosopher,&#8212;the
		Shakspeare, the earnest Thinker, wherever
		he may be:</p>

		<div class="poem">
		    <div class="stanza">
		        <p>&#8216;We are such stuff as Dreams are made of!&#8217;</p>
		    </div>
		</div>

		<p>One of Thor&#8217;s expeditions, to Utgard (the <i>Outer</i>
		Garden, central seat of Jötun-land), is remarkable in
		this respect. Thialfi was with him, and Loke. After
		various adventures they entered upon Giant-land;
		wandered over plains, wild uncultivated places, among
		stones and trees. At nightfall they noticed a house;
		and as the door, which indeed formed one whole side
		of the house, was open, they entered. It was a simple
		habitation; one large hall, altogether empty. They
		stayed there. Suddenly in the dead of the night loud
		noises alarmed them. Thor grasped his hammer; stood
		in the door, prepared for fight. His companions within
		ran hither and thither in their terror, seeking some
		outlet in that rude hall; they found a little closet at last,
		and took refuge there. Neither had Thor any battle:
		for, lo, in the morning it turned-out that the noise had
		been only the <em>snoring</em> of a certain enormous but peaceable
		Giant, the Giant Skrymir, who lay peaceably sleeping
		near by; and this that they took for a house was
		merely his <i>Glove</i>, thrown aside there; the door was the
		Glove-wrist; the little closet they had fled into was the
		Thumb! Such a glove;&#8212;I remark too that it had not
		fingers as ours have, but only a thumb, and the rest
		undivided: a most ancient, rustic glove!</p>

		<p>Skrymir now carried their portmanteau all day; Thor,
		however, had his own suspicions, did not like the ways
		of Skrymir; determined at night to put an end to him
		as he slept. Raising his hammer, he struck down into
		the Giant&#8217;s face a right thunderbolt blow, of force to
		rend rocks. The Giant merely awoke; rubbed his cheek,
		and said, Did a leaf fall? Again Thor struck, so soon
		as Skrymir again slept; a better blow than before:
		but the Giant only murmured, Was that a grain of sand?
		Thor&#8217;s third stroke was with both his hands (the
		&#8216;knuckles white&#8217; I suppose), and seemed to dint deep
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page274" name="page274"></a>274</span>into Skrymir&#8217;s visage; but he merely checked his snore,
		and remarked, There must be sparrows roosting in this
		tree, I think; what is that they have dropt?&#8212;At the
		gate of Utgard, a place so high that you had to &#8216;strain
		your neck bending back to see the top of it,&#8217; Skrymir
		went his ways. Thor and his companions were
		admitted; invited to take share in the games going on.
		To Thor, for his part, they handed a drinking-horn; it
		was a common feat, they told him, to drink this dry at
		one draught. Long and fiercely, three times over, Thor
		drank; but made hardly any impression. He was a
		weak child, they told him; could he lift that Cat he saw
		there? Small as the feat seemed, Thor with his whole
		godlike strength could not; he bent-up the creature&#8217;s
		back, could not raise its feet off the ground, could at the
		utmost raise one foot. Why, you are no man, said the
		Utgard people; there is an Old Woman that will wrestle
		you! Thor, heartily ashamed, seized this haggard Old
		Woman; but could not throw her.</p>

		<p>And now, on their quitting Utgard, the Chief Jötun,
		escorting them politely a little way, said to Thor:
		&#8220;You are beaten then:&#8212;yet be not so much ashamed;
		there was deception of appearance in it. That Horn you
		tried to drink was the <i>Sea</i>: you did make it ebb; but
		who could drink that, the bottomless! The Cat you
		would have lifted,&#8212;why, that is the <i>Midgard-snake</i>, the
		Great World-serpent, which, tail in mouth, girds and
		keeps-up the whole created world; had you torn that up,
		the world must have rushed to ruin! As for the Old
		Woman, she was <i>Time</i>, Old Age, Duration; with her
		what can wrestle? No man nor no god with her; gods
		or men, she prevails over all! And then those three
		strokes you struck,&#8212;look at these <em>three valleys</em>; your
		three strokes made these!&#8221; Thor looked at his attendant
		Jötun: it was Skrymir;&#8212;it was, say Norse critics,
		the old chaotic rocky <i>Earth</i> in person, and that glove-<em>house</em>
		was some Earth-cavern! But Skrymir had
		vanished; Utgard with its skyhigh gates, when Thor
		grasped his hammer to smite them, had gone to air;
		only the Giant&#8217;s voice was heard mocking: &#8220;Better
		come no more to Jötunheim!&#8221;&#8212;</p>

		<p>This is of the allegoric period, as we see, and half
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page275" name="page275"></a>275</span>play, not of the prophetic and entirely devout: but as
		a mythus is there not real antique Norse gold in it?
		More true metal, rough from the Mimerstithy, than in
		many a famed Greek Mythus <em>shaped</em> far better! A great
		broad Brobdignag grin of true humour is in this
		Skrymir; mirth resting on earnestness and sadness, as
		the rainbow on black tempest: only a right valiant heart
		is capable of that. It is the grim humour of our own
		Ben Jonson, rare old Ben; runs in the blood of us, I
		fancy; for one catches tones of it, under a still other
		shape, out of the American Backwoods.</p>

		<p>That is also a very striking conception, that of the
		<i>Ragnarök</i>, Consummation, or <i>Twilight of the Gods</i>. It
		is in the <i>Völuspa</i> Song; seemingly a very old, prophetic
		idea. The Gods and Jötuns, the divine Powers and the
		chaotic brute ones, after long contest and partial victory
		by the former, meet at last in universal world-embracing
		wrestle and duel; World-serpent against Thor, strength
		against strength; mutually extinctive; and ruin, &#8216;twilight&#8217;
		sinking into darkness, swallows the created
		Universe. The old Universe with its Gods is sunk; but
		it is not final death: there is to be a new Heaven and
		a new Earth; a higher supreme God, and Justice to
		reign among men. Curious: this law of mutation, which
		also is a law written in man&#8217;s inmost thought, had been
		deciphered by these old earnest Thinkers in their rude
		style; and how, though all dies, and even gods die, yet
		all death is but a phœnix fire-death, and new-birth into
		the Greater and the Better! It is the fundamental Law
		of Being for a creature made of Time, living in this
		Place of Hope. All earnest men have seen into it; may
		still see into it.</p>

		<p>And now, connected with this, let us glance at the
		<em>last</em> mythus of the appearance of Thor; and end there.
		I fancy it to be the latest in date of all these fables; a
		sorrowing protest against the advance of Christianity,&#8212;set
		forth reproachfully by some Conservative Pagan.
		King Olaf has been harshly blamed for his over-zeal
		in introducing Christianity; surely I should have blamed
		him far more for an under-zeal in that! He paid dear
		enough for it; he died by the revolt of his Pagan people,
		in battle, in the year 1033, at Stickelstad, near that
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page276" name="page276"></a>276</span>Drontheim, where the chief Cathedral of the North has
		now stood for many centuries, dedicated gratefully to
		his memory as <em>Saint</em> Olaf. The mythus about Thor is
		to this effect. King Olaf, the Christian Reform King,
		is sailing with fit escort along the shore of Norway,
		from haven to haven; dispensing justice, or doing other
		royal work: on leaving a certain haven, it is found that
		a stranger, of grave eyes and aspect, red beard, of
		stately robust figure, has stept in. The courtiers address
		him; his answers surprise by their pertinency and
		depth: at length he is brought to the King. The
		stranger&#8217;s conversation here is not less remarkable, as
		they sail along the beautiful shore; but after some time,
		he addresses King Olaf thus: &#8220;Yes, King Olaf, it is
		all beautiful, with the sun shining on it there; green,
		fruitful, a right fair home for you, and many a sore
		day had Thor, many a wild fight with the rock Jötuns,
		before he could make it so. And now you seem minded
		to put away Thor. King Olaf, have a care!&#8221; said the
		stranger, drawing-down his brows;&#8212;and when they
		looked again, he was nowhere to be found.&#8212;This is the
		last appearance of Thor on the stage of this world!</p>

		<p>Do we not see well enough how the Fable might arise,
		without unveracity on the part of any one? It is the
		way most Gods have come to appear among men: thus,
		if in Pindar&#8217;s time &#8216;Neptune was seen once at the
		Nemean Games,&#8217; what was this Neptune too but a
		&#8216;stranger of noble grave aspect,&#8217; <em>fit</em> to be &#8216;seen&#8217;!
		There is something pathetic, tragic for me in this last
		voice of Paganism. Thor is vanished, the whole Norse
		world has vanished; and will not return ever again. In
		like fashion to that pass away the highest things. All
		things that have been in this world, all things that are
		or will be in it, have to vanish, we have our sad farewell
		to give them.</p>

		<p>That Norse Religion, a rude but earnest, sternly
		impressive <i>Consecration of Valour</i> (so we may define
		it), sufficed for these old valiant Northmen. Consecration
		of Valour is not a <em>bad</em> thing! We will take it for
		good, so far as it goes. Neither is there no use in
		<em>knowing</em> something about this old Paganism of our
		Fathers. Unconsciously, and combined with higher
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page277" name="page277"></a>277</span>things, it is in <em>us</em> yet, that old Faith withal! To know
		it consciously, brings us into closer and clearer relation
		with the Past&#8212;with our own possessions in the Past.
		For the whole Past, as I keep repeating, is the possession
		of the Present; the Past had always something
		<em>true</em>, and is a precious possession. In a different time,
		in a different place, it is always some other <em>side</em> of our
		common Human Nature that has been developing itself.
		The actual True is the <em>sum</em> of all these; not any one of
		them by itself, constitutes what of Human Nature is
		hitherto developed. Better to know them all than misknow
		them. &#8220;To which of these Three Religions do
		you specially adhere?&#8221; inquires Meister of his Teacher.
		&#8220;To all the Three!&#8221; answers the other: &#8220;To all the
		Three: for they by their union first constitute the True
		Religion.&#8221;</p>

	</div>
	<div id="lectureii" class="lecture">
		<p class="lecture_head">LECTURE II</p>

		<h3 class="lecture_title">THE HERO AS PROPHET. MAHOMET: ISLAM</h3>

		<p class="lecture_date">[Friday, 8th May 1840]</p>

		<p><span class="first_word">From</span> the first rude times of Paganism among the
		Scandinavians in the North, we advance to a very
		different epoch of religion, among a very different
		people: Mahometanism among the Arabs. A great
		change; what a change and progress is indicated here,
		in the universal condition and thoughts of men!</p>

		<p>The Hero is not now regarded as a God among his
		fellowmen; but as one God-inspired, as a prophet. It
		is the second phasis of Hero-worship; the first or oldest,
		we may say, has passed away without return; in the
		history of the world there will not again be any man,
		never so great, whom his fellowmen will take for a god.
		Nay we might rationally ask, Did any set of human
		beings ever really think the man they <em>saw</em> there standing
		beside them a god, the maker of this world?
		Perhaps not: it was usually some man they remembered,
		or <em>had</em> seen. But neither can this any more be. The
		Great Man is not recognised henceforth as a god any
		more.</p>

		<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page278" name="page278"></a>278</span>It was a rude gross error, that of counting the Great
		Man a god. Yet let us say that it is at all times difficult
		to know <em>what</em> he is, or how to account of him and
		receive him! The most significant feature in the
		history of an epoch is the manner it has of welcoming
		a Great Man. Ever, to the true instincts of men, there
		is something godlike in him. Whether they shall take
		him to be a god, to be a prophet, or what they shall
		take him to be? that is ever a grand question; by their
		way of answering that, we shall see, as through a little
		window, into the very heart of these men&#8217;s spiritual
		condition. For at bottom the Great Man, as he comes
		from the hand of nature, is ever the same kind of thing:
		Odin, Luther, Johnson, Burns; I hope to make it appear
		that these are all originally of one stuff; that only by
		the world&#8217;s reception of them, and the shapes they
		assume, are they so immeasurably diverse. The worship
		of Odin astonishes us&#8212;to fall prostrate before
		the Great Man, into <i>deliquium</i> of love and wonder over
		him, and feel in their hearts that he was a denizen of
		the skies, a god! This was imperfect enough: but to
		welcome, for example, a Burns as we did, was that
		what we can call perfect? The most precious gift that
		Heaven can give to the Earth; a man of &#8216;genius&#8217; as
		we call it: the Soul of a Man actually sent down from
		the skies with a God&#8217;s-message to us&#8212;this we waste
		away as an idle artificial firework, sent to amuse us a
		little, and sink it into ashes, wreck and ineffectuality:
		<em>such</em> reception of a Great Man I do not call very perfect
		either! Looking into the heart of the thing, one may
		perhaps call that of Burns a still uglier phenomenon,
		betokening still sadder imperfections in mankind&#8217;s ways,
		than the Scandinavian method itself! To fall into mere
		unreasoning <i>deliquium</i> of love and admiration, was not
		good; but such unreasoning, nay irrational supercilious
		no-love at all is perhaps still worse!&#8212;It is a thing
		forever changing, this of Hero-worship: different in
		each age, difficult to do well in any age. Indeed, the
		heart of the whole business of the age, one may say,
		is to do it well.</p>

		<p>We have chosen Mahomet not as the most eminent
		Prophet, but as the one we are freest to speak of. He
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page279" name="page279"></a>279</span>is by no means the truest of Prophets; but I do esteem
		him a true one. Farther, as there is no danger of our
		becoming, any of us, Mahometans, I mean to say all
		the good of him I justly can. It is the way to get at
		his secret: let us try to understand what <em>he</em> meant with
		the world; what the world meant and means with him,
		will then be a more answerable question. Our current
		hypotheses about Mahomet, that he was a scheming
		Impostor, a Falsehood incarnate, that his religion is a
		mere mass of quackery and fatuity, begins really to be
		now untenable to any one. The lies, which well-meaning
		zeal has heaped round this man, are disgraceful to
		ourselves only. When Pococke inquired of Grotius,
		Where the proof was of that story of the pigeon, trained
		to pick peas from Mahomet&#8217;s ear, and pass for an angel
		dictating to him? Grotius answered that there was no
		proof! It is really time to dismiss all that. The word
		this man spoke has been the life-guidance now of a
		hundred-and-eighty millions of men these twelve-hundred
		years. These hundred-and-eighty millions were
		made by God as well as we. A greater number of God&#8217;s
		creatures believe in Mahomet&#8217;s word at this hour than
		in any other word whatever. Are we to suppose that
		it was a miserable piece of spiritual legerdemain, this
		which so many creatures of the Almighty have lived
		by and died by? I, for my part, cannot form any such
		supposition. I will believe most things sooner than
		that. One would be entirely at a loss what to think of
		this world at all, if quackery so grew and were sanctioned
		here.</p>

		<p>Alas, such theories are very lamentable. If we would
		attain to knowledge of anything in God&#8217;s true Creation,
		let us disbelieve them wholly! They are the product
		of an Age of Scepticism; they indicate the saddest
		spiritual paralysis, and mere death-life of the souls of
		men: more godless theory, I think, was never promulgated
		in this Earth. A false man found a religion?
		Why, a false man cannot build a brick house! If he do
		not know and follow <em>truly</em> the properties of mortar, burnt
		clay and what else he works in, it is no house that he
		makes, but a rubbish-heap. It will not stand for twelve
		centuries, to lodge a hundred-and-eighty millions; it will
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page280" name="page280"></a>280</span>fall straightway. A man must conform himself to
		Nature&#8217;s laws, <em>be</em> verily in communion with Nature and
		the truth of things, or Nature will answer him, No, not
		at all! Speciosities are specious&#8212;ah, me!&#8212;a Cagliostro,
		many Cagliostros, prominent world-leaders, do
		prosper by their quackery, for a day. It is like a forged
		bank-note; they get it passed out of <em>their</em> worthless
		hands: others, not they, have to smart for it. Nature
		bursts-up in fire-flame, French Revolutions and suchlike,
		proclaiming with terrible veracity that forged notes
		are forged.</p>

		<p>But of a Great Man especially, of him I will venture
		to assert that it is incredible he should have been other
		than true. It seems to me the primary foundation of
		him, and of all that can lie in him, this. No Mirabeau,
		Napoleon, Burns, Cromwell, no man adequate to do
		anything, but is first of all in right earnest about it;
		what I call a sincere man. I should say <em>sincerity</em>, a
		deep, great, genuine sincerity, is the first characteristic
		of all men in any way heroic. Not the sincerity that
		calls itself sincere; ah, no, that is a very poor matter
		indeed;&#8212;a shallow braggart conscious sincerity;
		oftenest self-conceit mainly. The Great Man&#8217;s sincerity
		is of the kind he cannot speak of, is not conscious of:
		nay, I suppose, he is conscious rather of <em>in</em>sincerity; for
		what man can walk accurately by the law of truth for
		one day? No, the Great Man does not boast himself
		sincere, far from that; perhaps does not ask himself if
		he is so: I would say rather, his sincerity does not
		depend on himself; he cannot help being sincere! The
		great Fact of Existence is great to him. Fly as he
		will, he cannot get out of the awful presence of this
		Reality. His mind is so made; he is great by that,
		first of all. Fearful and wonderful, real as Life, real
		as death, is this Universe to him. Though all men
		should forget its truth, and walk in a vain show, he
		cannot. At all moments the Flame-image glares-in
		upon him; undeniable, there, there!&#8212;I wish you to take
		this as my primary definition of a Great Man. A little
		man may have this, it is competent to all men that God
		has made: but a Great Man cannot be without it.</p>

		<p>Such a man is what we call an <em>original</em> man: he comes
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page281" name="page281"></a>281</span>to us at first-hand. A messenger he, sent from the
		Infinite Unknown with tidings to us. We may call him
		Poet, Prophet, God;&#8212;in one way or other, we all feel
		that the words he utters are as no other man&#8217;s words.
		Direct from the Inner Fact of things;&#8212;he lives, and
		has to live, in daily communion with that. Hearsays
		cannot hide it from him; he is blind, homeless, miserable,
		following hearsays; <em>it</em> glares-in upon him. Really
		his utterances, are they not a kind of &#8216;revelation;&#8217;&#8212;what
		we must call such for want of some other name?
		It is from the heart of the world that he comes; he is
		portion of the primal reality of things. God has made
		many revelations: but this man too, has not God made
		him, the latest and newest of all? The &#8216;inspiration of
		the Almighty giveth <em>him</em> understanding:&#8217; we must listen
		before all to him.</p>

		<p>This Mahomet, then, we will in no wise consider as
		an Inanity and Theatricality, a poor conscious ambitious
		schemer; we cannot conceive him so. The rude message
		he delivered was a real one withal; an earnest confused
		voice from the unknown Deep. The man&#8217;s words
		were not false, nor his workings here below; no Inanity
		and Simulacrum; a fiery mass of Life cast-up from the
		great bosom of Nature herself. To <em>kindle</em> the world;
		the world&#8217;s Maker had ordered it so. Neither can the
		faults, imperfections, insincerities even, of Mahomet, if
		such were never so well proved against him, shake this
		primary fact about him.</p>

		<p>On the whole, we make too much of faults; the details
		of the business hide the real centre of it. Faults?
		The greatest of faults, I should say, is to be conscious
		of none. Readers of the Bible above all, one would
		think, might know better. Who is called there &#8216;the
		man according to God&#8217;s own heart&#8217;? David, the
		Hebrew King, had fallen into sins enough; blackest
		crimes; there was no want of sins. And thereupon the
		unbelievers sneer and ask, Is this your man according
		to God&#8217;s own heart? The sneer, I must say, seems to
		me but a shallow one. What are faults, what are the
		outward details of a life; if the inner secret of it, the
		remorse, temptations, true, often-baffled, never-ended
		struggle of it, be forgotten? &#8216;It is not in man that
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page282" name="page282"></a>282</span>walketh to direct his steps.&#8217; Of all acts, is not, for a
		man, <em>repentance</em> the most divine? The deadliest sin, I
		say, were that same supercilious consciousness of no
		sin;&#8212;that is death; the heart so conscious is divorced
		from sincerity, humility and fact; is dead: it is &#8216;pure&#8217;
		as dead dry sand is pure. David&#8217;s life and history, as
		written for us in those Psalms of his, I consider to be
		the truest emblem ever given of a man&#8217;s moral progress
		and warfare here below. All earnest souls will ever
		discern in it the faithful struggle of an earnest human
		soul towards what is good and best. Struggle often
		baffled, sore baffled, down as into entire wreck; yet a
		struggle never ended; ever, with tears, repentance,
		true unconquerable purpose, begun anew. Poor human
		nature! Is not a man&#8217;s walking, in truth, always that:
		&#8216;a succession of falls&#8217;? Man can do no other. In
		this wild element of a Life, he has to struggle onwards;
		now fallen, deep-abased; and ever, with tears, repentance,
		with bleeding heart, he has to rise again, struggle
		again still onwards. That his struggle <em>be</em> a faithful
		unconquerable one: that is the question of questions.
		We will put-up with many sad details, if the soul of
		it were true. Details by themselves will never teach
		us what it is. I believe we misestimate Mahomet&#8217;s
		faults even as faults: but the secret of him will never
		be got by dwelling there. We will leave all this behind
		us; and assuring ourselves that he did mean some true
		thing, ask candidly what it was or might be.</p>

		<p class="post_thoughtbreak">These Arabs Mahomet was born among are certainly
		a notable people. Their country itself is notable; the
		fit habitation for such a race. Savage inaccessible rock-mountains,
		great grim deserts, alternating with beautiful
		strips of verdure: wherever water is, there is greenness,
		beauty; odoriferous balm-shrubs, date-trees,
		frankincense-trees. Consider that wide waste horizon
		of sand, empty, silent, like a sand-sea, dividing habitable
		place from habitable. You are all alone there, left
		alone with the Universe; by day a fierce sun blazing
		down on it with intolerable radiance; by night the
		great deep Heaven with its stars. Such a country is
		fit for a swift-handed, deep-hearted race of men. There
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page283" name="page283"></a>283</span>is something most agile, active, and yet most meditative,
		enthusiastic in the Arab character. The Persians
		are called the French of the East, we will call the Arabs
		Oriental Italians. A gifted noble people; a people of
		wild strong feelings, and of iron restraint over these:
		the characteristic of noblemindedness, of genius. The
		wild Bedouin welcomes the stranger to his tent, as one
		having right to all that is there; were it his worst
		enemy, he will slay his foal to treat him, will serve
		him with sacred hospitality for three days, will set him
		fairly on his way;&#8212;and then, by another law as sacred,
		kill him if he can. In words too, as in action. They
		are not a loquacious people, taciturn rather; but
		eloquent, gifted when they do speak. An earnest truthful
		kind of men. They are, as we know, of Jewish
		kindred: but with that deadly terrible earnestness of
		the Jews they seem to combine something graceful,
		brilliant, which is not Jewish. They had &#8216;Poetic contests&#8217;
		among them before the time of Mahomet. Sale
		says, at Ocadh, in the South of Arabia, there were
		yearly fairs, and there, when the merchandising was
		done, Poets sang for prizes:&#8212;the wild people gathered
		to hear that.</p>

		<p>One Jewish quality these Arabs manifest; the outcome
		of many or of all high qualities; what we may
		call religiosity. From of old they had been zealous
		workers, according to their light. They worshipped
		the stars, as Sabeans; worshipped many natural objects,&#8212;recognised
		them as symbols, immediate manifestations,
		of the Maker of Nature. It was wrong; and yet
		not wholly wrong. All God&#8217;s works are still in a sense
		symbols of God. Do we not, as I urged, still account
		it a merit to recognise a certain inexhaustible significance,
		&#8216;poetic beauty&#8217; as we name it, in all natural
		objects whatsoever? A man is a poet, and honoured,
		for doing that, and speaking or singing it,&#8212;a kind of
		diluted worship. They had many Prophets, these
		Arabs; Teachers each to his tribe, each according to
		the light he had. But indeed, have we not from of old
		the noblest of proofs, still palpable to every one of us,
		of what devoutness and noblemindedness had dwelt in
		these rustic thoughtful peoples? Biblical critics seem
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page284" name="page284"></a>284</span>agreed that our own <i>Book of Job</i> was written in that
		region of the world. I call that, apart from all theories
		about it, one of the grandest things ever written with
		pen. One feels, indeed, as if it were not Hebrew; such
		a noble universality, different from noble patriotism or
		sectarianism, reigns in it. A noble Book; all men&#8217;s
		Book! It is our first, oldest statement of the never-ending
		Problem,&#8212;man&#8217;s destiny, and God&#8217;s ways with
		him here in this earth. And all in such free flowing
		outlines; grand in its sincerity, in its simplicity; in its
		epic melody, and repose of reconcilement. There is the
		seeing eye, the mildly understanding heart. So <em>true</em>
		everywhere; true eyesight and vision for all things;
		material things no less than spiritual; the Horse,&#8212;&#8216;hast
		thou clothed his neck with <em>thunder</em>?&#8217;&#8212;he &#8216;<em>laughs</em> at
		the shaking of the spear!&#8217; Such living likenesses were
		never since drawn. Sublime sorrow, sublime reconciliation:
		oldest choral melody as of the heart of mankind;&#8212;so
		soft, and great; as the summer midnight, as
		the world with its seas and stars! There is nothing
		written, I think, in the Bible or out of it, of equal
		literary merit.&#8212;</p>

		<p>To the idolatrous Arabs one of the most ancient
		universal objects of worship was that Black Stone, still
		kept in the building called Caabah at Mecca. Diodorus
		Siculus mentions this Caabah in a way not to be mistaken,
		as the oldest, most honoured temple in his time;
		that is, some half-century before our Era. Silvestre de
		Sacy says there is some likelihood that the Black Stone
		is an aerolite. In that case, some one might <em>see</em> it fall
		out of Heaven! It stands now beside the Well Zemzem;
		the Caabah is built over both. A Well is in all
		places a beautiful affecting object, gushing out like
		life from the hard earth;&#8212;still more so in these hot
		dry countries, where it is the first condition of being.
		The Well Zemzem has its name from the bubbling
		sound of the waters, <i>zem-zem</i>; they think it is the Well
		which Hagar found with her little Ishmael in the wilderness:
		the aerolite and it have been sacred now, and had
		a Caabah over them, for thousands of years. A curious
		object, that Caabah! There it stands at this hour, in
		the black cloth-covering the Sultan sends it yearly;
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page285" name="page285"></a>285</span>&#8216;twenty-seven cubits high;&#8217; with circuit, with double
		circuit of pillars, with festoon-rows of lamps and quaint
		ornaments: the lamps will be lighted again <em>this</em> night,&#8212;to
		glitter again under the stars. An authentic fragment
		of the oldest Past. It is the <i>Keblah</i> of all Moslem:
		from Delhi all onwards to Morocco, the eyes of innumerable
		praying men are turned towards <em>it</em>, five times,
		this day and all days: one of the notablest centres in
		the Habitation of Men.</p>

		<p>It had been from the sacredness attached to this
		Caabah Stone and Hagar&#8217;s Well, from the pilgrimings
		of all tribes of Arabs thither, that Mecca took
		its rise as a Town. A great town once, though much
		decayed now. It has no natural advantage for a town;
		stands in a sandy hollow amid bare barren hills, at a
		distance from the sea; its provisions, its very bread,
		have to be imported. But so many pilgrims needed
		lodgings: and then all places of pilgrimage do, from
		the first, become places of trade. The first day pilgrims
		meet, merchants have also met: where men see themselves
		assembled for one object, they find that they can
		accomplish other objects which depend on meeting together.
		Mecca became the Fair of all Arabia. And
		thereby indeed the chief staple and warehouse of whatever
		Commerce there was between the Indian and
		Western countries, Syria, Egypt, even Italy. It had
		at one time a population of 100,000; buyers, forwarders
		of those Eastern and Western products; importers for
		their own behoof of provisions and corn. The government
		was a kind of irregular aristocratic republic, not
		without a touch of theocracy. Ten Men of a chief tribe,
		chosen in some rough way, were Governors of Mecca,
		and Keepers of the Caabah. The Koreish were the chief
		tribe in Mahomet&#8217;s time; his own family was of that
		tribe. The rest of the Nation, fractioned and cut-asunder
		by deserts, lived under similar rude patriarchal
		governments by one or several: herdsmen, carriers,
		traders, generally robbers too; being oftenest at war
		one with another, or with all: held together by no open
		bond, if it were not this meeting at the Caabah, where
		all forms of Arab Idolatry assembled in common adoration;&#8212;held
		mainly by the <em>inward</em> indissoluble bond of
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page286" name="page286"></a>286</span>a common blood and language. In this way had the
		Arabs lived for long ages, unnoticed by the world:
		a people of great qualities, unconsciously waiting for
		the day when they should become notable to all the
		world. Their Idolatries appear to have been in a tottering
		state; much was getting into confusion and fermentation
		among them. Obscure tidings of the most
		important Event ever transacted in this world, the Life
		and Death of the Divine Man in Judea, at once the
		symptom and cause of immeasurable change to all people
		in the world, had in the course of centuries reached
		into Arabia too; and could not but, of itself, have
		produced fermentation there.</p>

		<p class="post_thoughtbreak">It was among this Arab people, so circumstanced, in
		the year 570 of our Era, that the man Mahomet was
		born. He was of the family of Hashem, of the Koreish
		tribe as we said; though poor, connected with the chief
		persons of his country.</p>

		<p>Almost at his birth he lost his Father; at the age
		of six years his Mother too, a woman noted for her
		beauty, her worth and sense: he fell to the charge of
		his Grandfather, an old man, a hundred years old. A
		good old man: Mahomet&#8217;s Father, Abdallah, had been
		his youngest favourite son. He saw in Mahomet, with
		his old life-worn eyes, a century old, the lost Abdallah
		come back again, all that was left of Abdallah. He
		loved the little orphan Boy greatly; used to say, They
		must take care of that beautiful little Boy, nothing in
		their kindred was more precious than he. At his death,
		while the boy was still but two years old, he left him
		in charge to Abu Thaleb the eldest of the Uncles, as
		to him that now was head of the house. By this Uncle,
		a just and rational man as everything betokens,
		Mahomet was brought-up in the best Arab way.</p>

		<p>Mahomet, as he grew up, accompanied his Uncle on
		trading journeys and suchlike; in his eighteenth year
		one finds him a fighter following his Uncle in war. But
		perhaps the most significant of all his journeys is one
		we find noted as of some years&#8217; earlier date: a journey
		to the Fairs of Syria. The young man here first came
		in contact with a quite foreign world,&#8212;with one foreign
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page287" name="page287"></a>287</span>element of endless moment to him: the Christian
		Religion. I know not what to make of that &#8216;Sergius,
		the Nestorian Monk,&#8217; whom Abu Thaleb and he are
		said to have lodged with; or how much any monk could
		have taught one still so young. Probably enough it is
		greatly exaggerated, this of the Nestorian Monk.
		Mahomet was only fourteen; had no language but his
		own: much in Syria must have been a strange unintelligible
		whirlpool to him. But the eyes of the lad were
		open; glimpses of many things would doubtless be
		taken-in, and lie very enigmatic as yet, which were to
		ripen in a strange way into views, into beliefs and
		insights one day. These journeys to Syria were probably
		the beginning of much to Mahomet.</p>

		<p>One other circumstance we must not forget: that he
		had no school-learning; of the thing we call school-learning
		none at all. The art of writing was but just
		introduced into Arabia; it seems to be the true opinion
		that Mahomet never could write! Life in the Desert,
		with its experiences, was all his education. What of
		this infinite Universe he, from his dim place, with his
		own eyes and thoughts, could take in, so much and no
		more of it was he to know. Curious, if we will reflect
		on it, this of having no books. Except by what he
		could see for himself, or hear of by uncertain rumour
		of speech in the obscure Arabian Desert, he could know
		nothing. The wisdom that had been before him or at
		a distance from him in the world, was in a manner as
		good as not there for him. Of the great brother souls,
		flame-beacons through so many lands and times, no one
		directly communicates with this great soul. He is
		alone there, deep down in the bosom of the Wilderness;
		has to grow up so,&#8212;alone with Nature and his own
		Thoughts.</p>

		<p>But, from an early age, he had been remarked as
		a thoughtful man. His companions named him &#8216;<i>Al
		Amin</i>, The Faithful.&#8217; A man of truth and fidelity;
		true in what he did, in what he spake and thought.
		They noted that <em>he</em> always meant something. A man
		rather taciturn in speech; silent when there was nothing
		to be said; but pertinent, wise, sincere, when he did
		speak; always throwing light on the matter. This is
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page288" name="page288"></a>288</span>the only sort of speech <em>worth</em> speaking! Through life
		we find him to have been regarded as an altogether
		solid, brotherly, genuine man. A serious, sincere character;
		yet amiable, cordial, companionable, jocose even;&#8212;a
		good laugh in him withal: there are men whose
		laugh is as untrue as anything about them; who cannot
		laugh. One hears of Mahomet&#8217;s beauty: his fine
		sagacious honest face, brown florid complexion, beaming
		black eyes;&#8212;I somehow like too that vein on the
		brow, which swelled-up black when he was in anger:
		like the &#8216;<em>horse-shoe</em> vein&#8217; in Scott&#8217;s <i>Redgauntlet</i>. It
		was a kind of feature in the Hashem family, this black
		swelling vein in the brow; Mahomet had it prominent,
		as would appear. A spontaneous, passionate, yet just,
		true-meaning man! Full of wild faculty, fire and light:
		of wild worth, all uncultured; working out his life-task
		in the depths of the Desert there.</p>

		<p>How he was placed with Kadijah, a rich Widow,
		as her Steward, and travelled in her business, again to
		the Fairs of Syria; how he managed all, as one can well
		understand, with fidelity, adroitness; how her gratitude,
		her regard for him grew: the story of their marriage
		is altogether a graceful intelligible one, as told us by
		the Arab authors. He was twenty-five; she forty,
		though still beautiful. He seems to have lived in a
		most affectionate, peaceable, wholesome way with this
		wedded benefactress; loving her truly, and her alone.
		It goes greatly against the impostor theory, the fact that
		he lived in this entirely unexceptionable, entirely quiet
		and commonplace way, till the heat of his years was
		done. He was forty before he talked of any mission
		from Heaven. All his irregularities, real and supposed,
		date from after his fiftieth year, when the good Kadijah
		died. All his &#8216;ambition,&#8217; seemingly, had been, hitherto,
		to live an honest life; his &#8216;fame,&#8217; the mere good
		opinion of neighbours that knew him, had been sufficient
		hitherto. Not till he was already getting old, the prurient
		heat of his life all burnt out, and <em>peace</em> growing to
		be the chief thing this world could give him, did he
		start on the &#8216;career of ambition;&#8217; and, belying all his
		past character and existence, set-up as a wretched
		empty charlatan to acquire what he could now no longer
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page289" name="page289"></a>289</span>enjoy! For my share, I have no faith whatever in
		that.</p>

		<p>Ah no: this deep-hearted Son of the Wilderness,
		with his beaming black eyes and open social deep soul,
		had other thoughts in him than ambition. A silent
		great soul; he was one of those who cannot <em>but</em> be in
		earnest; whom Nature herself has appointed to be
		sincere. While others walk in formulas and hearsays,
		contented enough to dwell there, this man could not
		screen himself in formulas; he was alone with his own
		soul and the reality of things. The great Mystery of
		Existence, as I said, glared-in upon him, with its terrors,
		with its splendours; no hearsays could hide that unspeakable
		fact, &#8220;Here am I!&#8221; Such <em>sincerity</em>, as we
		named it, has in very truth something of divine. The
		word of such a man is a Voice direct from Nature&#8217;s own
		Heart. Men do and must listen to that as to nothing
		else;&#8212;all else is wind in comparison. From of old, a
		thousand thoughts, in his pilgrimings and wanderings,
		had been in this man: What am I? What <em>is</em> this unfathomable
		Thing I live in, which men name Universe?
		What is Life; what is Death? What am I to believe?
		What am I to do? The grim rocks of Mount Hara,
		of Mount Sinai, the stern sandy solitudes answered not.
		The great Heaven rolling silent overhead, with its blue-glancing
		stars, answered not. There was no answer.
		The man&#8217;s own soul, and what of God&#8217;s inspiration
		dwelt there, had to answer!</p>

		<p>It is the thing which all men have to ask themselves;
		which we too have to ask, and answer. This wild man
		felt it to be of <em>infinite</em> moment; all other things of no
		moment whatever in comparison. The jargon of argumentative
		Greek Sects, vague traditions of Jews, the
		stupid routine of Arab Idolatry, there was no answer
		in these. A Hero, as I repeat, has this first distinction,
		which indeed we may call first and last, the Alpha and
		Omega of his whole Heroism, That he looks through the
		shows of things into <em>things</em>. Use and wont, respectable
		hearsay, respectable formula: all these are good, or
		are not good. There is something behind and beyond
		all these, which all these must correspond with, be the
		image of, or they are&#8212;<i>Idolatries</i>: &#8216;bits of black wood
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page290" name="page290"></a>290</span>pretending to be God;&#8217; to the earnest soul a mockery
		and abomination. Idolatries never so gilded, waited
		on by heads of the Koreish, will do nothing for this
		man. Though all men walk by them, what good is it?
		The great Reality stands glaring there upon <em>him</em>. He
		there has to answer it, or perish miserably. Now, even
		now, or else through all Eternity never! Answer it;
		<em>thou</em> must find an answer.&#8212;Ambition? What could all
		Arabia do for this man; with the crown of Greek Heraclius,
		of Persian Chosroes, and all crowns in the Earth;&#8212;what
		could they all do for him? It was not of the
		Earth he wanted to hear tell; it was of the Heaven
		above and of the Hell beneath. All crowns and
		sovereignties whatsoever, where would <em>they</em> in a few
		brief years be? To be Sheik of Mecca or Arabia, and
		have a bit of gilt wood put into your hand,&#8212;will that
		be one&#8217;s salvation? I decidedly think, not. We will
		leave it altogether, this impostor hypothesis, as not
		credible; not very tolerable even, worthy chiefly of
		dismissal by us.</p>

		<p>Mahomet had been wont to retire yearly, during the
		month Ramadhan, into solitude and silence; as indeed
		was the Arab custom; a praiseworthy custom, which
		such a man, above all, would find natural and useful.
		Communing with his own heart, in the silence of the
		mountains; himself silent; open to the &#8216;small still
		voices:&#8217; it was a right natural custom! Mahomet was
		in his fortieth year, when having withdrawn to a cavern
		in Mount Hara, near Mecca, during this Ramadhan,
		to pass the month in prayer, and meditation on those
		great questions, he one day told his wife Kadijah, who
		with his household was with him or near him this year,
		That by the unspeakable special favour of Heaven he
		had now found it all out; was in doubt and darkness
		no longer, but saw it all. That all these Idols and
		Formulas were nothing, miserable bits of wood; that
		there was One God in and over all; and we must leave
		all Idols, and look to Him. That God is great; and
		that there is nothing else great! He is the Reality.
		Wooden Idols are not real; He is real. He made us
		at first, sustains us yet; we and all things are but the
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page291" name="page291"></a>291</span>shadow of Him; a transitory garment veiling the
		Eternal Splendour. &#8216;<i>Allah akbar</i>, God is great;&#8217;&#8212;and
		then also &#8216;<i>Islam</i>,&#8217; That we must <em>submit</em> to God. That
		our whole strength lies in resigned submission to Him,
		whatsoever He do to us. For this world, and for the
		other! The thing He sends to us, were it death and
		worse than death, shall be good, shall be best; we resign
		ourselves to God.&#8212;&#8216;If this be <i>Islam</i>,&#8217; says Goethe, &#8216;do
		we not all live in <i>Islam</i>?&#8217; Yes, all of us that have any
		moral life; we all live so. It has ever been held the
		highest wisdom for a man not merely to submit to
		Necessity,&#8212;Necessity will make him submit,&#8212;but to
		know and believe well that the stern thing which Necessity
		had ordered was the wisest, the best, the thing
		wanted there. To cease his frantic pretension of scanning
		this great God&#8217;s-World in his small fraction of a
		brain; to know that it <em>had</em> verily, though deep beyond
		his soundings, a Just Law, that the soul of it was
		Good;&#8212;that his part in it was to conform to the Law
		of the Whole, and in devout silence follow that; not
		questioning it, obeying it as unquestionable.</p>

		<p>I say, this is yet the only true morality known. A
		man is right and invincible, virtuous and on the road
		towards sure conquest, precisely while he joins himself
		to the great deep Law of the World, in spite of all superficial
		laws, temporary appearances, profit-and-loss calculations;
		he is victorious while he coöperates with that
		great central Law, not victorious otherwise:&#8212;and surely
		his first chance of coöperating with it, or getting into
		the course of it, is to know with his whole soul that
		it <em>is</em>; that it is good, and alone good! This is the soul
		of Islam; it is properly the soul of Christianity;&#8212;for
		Islam is definable as a confused form of Christianity;
		had Christianity not been, neither had it been. Christianity
		also commands us, before all, to be resigned to
		God. We are to take no counsel with flesh-and-blood;
		give ear to no vain cavils, vain sorrows and wishes: to
		know that we know nothing; that the worst and
		cruelest to our eyes is not what it seems; that we have
		to receive whatsoever befalls us as sent from God above,
		and say, It is good and wise, God is great! &#8220;Though
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page292" name="page292"></a>292</span>He slay me, yet will I trust in Him.&#8221; Islam means
		in its way Denial of Self, Annihilation of Self. This
		is yet the highest Wisdom that Heaven has revealed to
		our Earth.</p>

		<p>Such light had come, as it could, to illuminate the
		darkness of this wild Arab soul. A confused dazzling,
		splendour as of life and Heaven, in the great darkness
		which threatened to be death: he called it revelation
		and the angel Gabriel;&#8212;who of us yet can know what
		to call it? It is the &#8216;inspiration of the Almighty that
		giveth us understanding.&#8217; To <em>know</em>; to get into the
		truth of anything, is ever a mystic act,&#8212;of which the
		best Logics can but babble on the surface. &#8216;Is not
		Belief the true god-announcing Miracle?&#8217; says Novalis.&#8212;That
		Mahomet&#8217;s whole soul, set in flame with this
		grand Truth vouchsafed him, should feel as if it were
		important and the only important thing, was very
		natural. That Providence had unspeakably honoured
		<em>him</em> by revealing it, saving him from death and darkness;
		that he therefore was bound to make known the
		same to all creatures: this is what was meant by
		&#8216;Mahomet is the Prophet of God;&#8217; this too is not without
		its true meaning.&#8212;</p>

		<p>The good Kadijah, we can fancy, listened to him with
		wonder, with doubt: at length she answered: Yes,
		it was <em>true</em> this that he said. One can fancy too the
		boundless gratitude of Mahomet; and how of all the
		kindnesses she had done him, this of believing the
		earnest struggling word he now spoke was the greatest.
		&#8216;It is certain,&#8217; says Novalis, &#8216;my Conviction gains
		infinitely, the moment another soul will believe in it.&#8217;
		It is a boundless favour.&#8212;He never forgot this good
		Kadijah. Long afterwards, Ayesha his young favourite
		wife, a woman who indeed distinguished herself among
		the Moslem, by all manner of qualities, through her
		whole long life; this young brilliant Ayesha was, one
		day, questioning him: &#8220;Now am not I better than
		Kadijah? She was a widow; old, and had lost her
		looks: you love me better than you did her?&#8221;&#8212;&#8220;No,
		by Allah!&#8221; answered Mahomet: &#8220;No, by Allah!
		She believed in me when none else would believe. In
		the whole world I had but one friend, and she was
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page293" name="page293"></a>293</span>that!&#8221;&#8212;Seid, his Slave, also believed in him; these
		with his young Cousin Ali, Abu Thaleb&#8217;s son, were his
		first converts.</p>

		<p>He spoke of his Doctrine to this man and that; but
		the most treated it with ridicule, with indifference; in
		three years, I think, he had gained but thirteen followers.
		His progress was slow enough. His encouragement to
		go on, was altogether the usual encouragement that such
		a man in such a case meets. After some three years of
		small success, he invited forty of his chief kindred to
		an entertainment; and there stood-up and told them
		what his pretension was: that he had this thing to
		promulgate abroad to all men; that it was the highest
		thing, the one thing: which of them would second him
		in that? Amid the doubt and silence of all, young Ali,
		as yet a lad of sixteen, impatient of the silence, started-up,
		and exclaimed in passionate fierce language, That
		he would! The assembly, among whom was Abu
		Thaleb, Ali&#8217;s Father, could not be unfriendly to Mahomet;
		yet the sight there, of one unlettered elderly man,
		with a lad of sixteen, deciding on such an enterprise
		against all mankind, appeared ridiculous to them; the
		assembly broke-up in laughter. Nevertheless it proved
		not a laughable thing; it was a very serious thing!
		As for this young Ali, one cannot but like him. A
		noble-minded creature, as he shows himself, now and
		always afterwards; full of affection, of fiery daring.
		Something chivalrous in him; brave as a lion; yet
		with a grace, a truth and affection worthy of Christian
		knighthood. He died by assassination in the Mosque
		at Bagdad; a death occasioned by his own generous
		fairness, confidence in the fairness of others: he said,
		If the wound proved not unto death, they must pardon
		the Assassin; but if it did, then they must slay him
		straightway, that so they two in the same hour might
		appear before God, and see which side of that quarrel
		was the just one!</p>

		<p>Mahomet naturally gave offence to the Koreish,
		Keepers of the Caabah, superintendents of the Idols.
		One or two men of influence had joined him: the thing
		spread slowly, but it was spreading. Naturally, he
		gave offence to everybody: Who is this that pretends
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page294" name="page294"></a>294</span>to be wiser than we all; that rebukes us all, as mere
		fools and worshippers of wood! Abu Thaleb the good
		Uncle spoke with him: Could he not be silent about
		all that; believe it all for himself, and not trouble
		others, anger the chief men, endanger himself and them
		all, talking of it? Mahomet answered: If the Sun
		stood on his right hand and the Moon on his left,
		ordering him to hold his peace, he could not obey!
		No: there was something in this Truth he had got
		which was of Nature herself; equal in rank to Sun,
		or Moon, or whatsoever thing Nature had made. It
		would speak itself there, so long as the Almighty
		allowed it, in spite of Sun and Moon, and all Koreish
		and all men and things. It must do that, and could
		do no other. Mahomet answered so; and, they say,
		&#8216;burst into tears.&#8217; Burst into tears: he felt that Abu
		Thaleb was good to him; that the task he had got
		was no soft, but a stern and great one.</p>

		<p>He went on speaking to who would listen to him;
		publishing his Doctrine among the pilgrims as they
		came to Mecca; gaining adherents in this place and
		that. Continual contradiction, hatred, open or secret
		danger attended him. His powerful relations protected
		Mahomet himself; but by and by, on his own advice,
		all his adherents had to quit Mecca, and seek refuge in
		Abyssinia over the sea. The Koreish grew ever angrier;
		laid plots, and swore oaths among them, to put Mahomet
		to death with their own hands. Abu Thaleb was
		dead, the good Kadijah was dead. Mahomet is not
		solicitous of sympathy from us; but his outlook at this
		time was one of the dismalest. He had to hide in
		caverns, escape in disguise; fly hither and thither;
		homeless, in continual peril of his life. More than once
		it seemed all-over with him; more than once it turned
		on a straw, some rider&#8217;s horse taking fright or the like,
		whether Mahomet and his Doctrine had not ended
		there, and not been heard of at all. But it was not to
		end so.</p>

		<p>In the thirteenth year of his mission, finding his
		enemies all banded against him, forty sworn men, one
		out of every tribe, waiting to take his life, and no continuance
		possible at Mecca for him any longer, Mahomet
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page295" name="page295"></a>295</span>fled to the place then called Yathreb, where he had
		gained some adherents; the place they now call Medina,
		or &#8216;<i>Medinat al Nabi</i>, the City of the Prophet,&#8217; from
		that circumstance. It lay some 200 miles off, through
		rocks and deserts; not without great difficulty, in such
		mood as we may fancy, he escaped thither, and found
		welcome. The whole East dates its era from this
		Flight, <i>Hegira</i> as they name it: the Year 1 of this
		Hegira is 622 of our Era, the fifty-third of Mahomet&#8217;s
		life. He was now becoming an old man; his friends
		sinking round him one by one: his path desolate, encompassed
		with danger: unless he could find hope in
		his own heart, the outward face of things was but
		hopeless for him. It is so with all men in the like
		case. Hitherto Mahomet had professed to publish his
		Religion by the way of preaching and persuasion alone.
		But now, driven foully out of his native country, since
		unjust men had not only given no ear to his earnest
		Heaven&#8217;s-message, the deep cry of his heart, but would
		not even let him live if he kept speaking it,&#8212;the wild
		Son of the Desert resolved to defend himself, like a
		man and Arab. If the Koreish will have it so, they
		shall have it. Tidings, felt to be of infinite moment
		to them and all men, they would not listen to these;
		would trample them down by sheer violence, steel and
		murder: well, let steel try it then! Ten years more
		this Mahomet had: all of fighting, of breathless impetuous
		toil and struggle; with what result we know.</p>

		<p>Much has been said of Mahomet&#8217;s propagating his
		Religion by the sword. It is no doubt far nobler what
		we have to boast of the Christian Religion, that it propagated
		itself peaceably in the way of preaching and
		conviction. Yet withal, if we take this for an argument
		of the truth or falsehood of a religion, there is a radical
		mistake in it. The sword indeed: but where will you
		get your sword! Every new opinion, at its starting,
		is precisely in a <em>minority of one</em>. In one man&#8217;s head
		alone, there it dwells as yet. One man alone of the
		whole world believes it; there is one man against all
		men. That <em>he</em> take a sword, and try to propagate with
		that, will do little for him. You must first get your
		sword! On the whole, a thing will propagate itself as
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page296" name="page296"></a>296</span>it can. We do not find, of the Christian Religion
		either, that it always disdained the sword, when once it
		had got one. Charlemagne&#8217;s conversion of the Saxons
		was not by preaching. I care little about the sword: I
		will allow a thing to struggle for itself in this world,
		with any sword or tongue or implement it has, or can
		lay hold of. We will let it preach, and pamphleteer,
		and fight, and to the uttermost bestir itself, and do,
		beak and claws, whatsoever is in it; very sure that
		it will, in the long-run, conquer nothing which does
		not deserve to be conquered. What is better than itself,
		it cannot put away, but only what is worse. In
		this great Duel, Nature herself is umpire, and can do
		no wrong: the thing which is deepest-rooted in Nature,
		what we call <em>truest</em>, that thing and not the other will be
		found growing at last.</p>

		<p>Here however, in reference to much that there is in
		Mahomet and his success, we are to remember what
		an umpire Nature is; what a greatness, composure of
		depth and tolerance there is in her. You take wheat
		to cast into the Earth&#8217;s bosom: your wheat may be
		mixed with chaff, chopped straw, barn-sweepings, dust
		and all imaginable rubbish; no matter: you cast it
		into the kind just Earth; she grows the wheat,&#8212;the
		whole rubbish she silently absorbs, shrouds <em>it</em> in, says
		nothing of the rubbish. The yellow wheat is growing
		there; the good Earth is silent about all the rest,&#8212;has
		silently turned all the rest to some benefit too, and
		makes no complaint about it! So everywhere in
		Nature! She is true and not a lie; and yet so great,
		and just, and motherly in her truth. She requires of a
		thing only that it <em>be</em> genuine of heart; she will protect
		it if so; will not, if not so. There is a soul of truth
		in all the things she ever gave harbour to. Alas, is
		not this the history of all highest Truth that comes or
		ever came into the world? The <em>body</em> of them all is
		imperfection, an element of light <em>in</em> darkness: to us
		they have to come embodied in mere Logic, in some
		merely <em>scientific</em> Theorem of the Universe; which <em>cannot</em>
		be complete; which cannot but be found, one day,
		incomplete, erroneous, and so die and disappear. The
		body of all Truth dies; and yet in all, I say, there is
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page297" name="page297"></a>297</span>a soul which never dies; which in new and ever-nobler
		embodiment lives immortal as man himself! It is the
		way with Nature. The genuine essence of Truth never
		dies. That it be genuine, a voice from the great Deep
		of Nature, there is the point at Nature&#8217;s judgment-seat.
		What <em>we</em> call pure or impure, is not with her the final
		question. Not how much chaff is in you; but whether
		you have any wheat. Pure? I might say to many a
		man: Yes, you are pure; pure enough; but you are
		chaff,&#8212;insincere hypothesis, hearsay, formality; you
		never were in contact with the great heart of the Universe
		at all; you are properly neither pure nor impure;
		you <em>are</em> nothing, Nature has no business with you.</p>

		<p>Mahomet&#8217;s Creed we called a kind of Christianity;
		and really, if we look at the wild rapt earnestness with
		which it was believed and laid to heart, I should say
		a better kind than that of those miserable Syrian Sects,
		with their vain janglings about <i>Homoiousion</i> and
		<i>Homoousion</i>, the head full of worthless noise, the heart
		empty and dead! The truth of it is embedded in portentous
		error and falsehood; but the truth of it makes
		it be believed, not the falsehood: it succeeded by its
		truth. A bastard kind of Christianity, but a living
		kind; with a heart-life in it: not dead, chopping barren
		logic merely! Out of all that rubbish of Arab idolatries,
		argumentative theologies, traditions, subtleties,
		rumours and hypotheses of Greeks and Jews, with their
		idle wire-drawings, this wild man of the Desert, with
		his wild sincere heart, earnest as death and life, with
		his great flashing natural eyesight, had seen into the
		kernel of the matter. Idolatry is nothing: these
		Wooden Idols of yours, &#8216;ye rub them with oil and
		wax, and the flies stick on them,&#8217;&#8212;these are wood, I
		tell you! They can do nothing for you; they are an
		impotent blasphemous pretence; a horror and abomination,
		if ye knew them. God alone is; God alone has
		power; He made us, He can kill us and keep us alive:
		&#8216;<i>Allah akbar</i>, God is great.&#8217; Understand that His will
		is the best for you; that howsoever sore to flesh-and-blood,
		you will find it the wisest, best: you are bound
		to take it so; in this world and in the next, you have
		no other thing that you can do!</p>

		<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page298" name="page298"></a>298</span>And now if the wild idolatrous men did believe this,
		and with their fiery hearts laid hold of it to do it, in
		what form soever it came to them, I say it was well
		worthy of being believed. In one form or the other, I
		say it is still the one thing worthy of being believed
		by all men. Man does hereby become the high-priest
		of this Temple of a World. He is in harmony with the
		Decrees of the Author of this World; coöperating with
		them, not vainly withstanding them: I know, to this
		day, no better definition of Duty than that same. All
		that is <em>right</em> includes itself in this of coöperating with
		the real Tendency of the World; you succeed by this
		(the World&#8217;s Tendency will succeed), you are good,
		and in the right course there. <i>Homoiousion</i>, <i>Homoousion</i>,
		vain logical jangle, then or before or at any time,
		may jangle itself out, and go whither and how it likes:
		this is the <em>thing</em> it all struggles to mean, if it would
		mean anything. If it do not succeed in meaning this,
		it means nothing. Not that Abstractions, logical Propositions,
		be correctly worded or incorrectly; but that
		living concrete Sons of Adam do lay this to heart: that
		is the important point. Islam devoured all these vain
		jangling Sects; and I think had right to do so. It
		was a Reality, direct from the great Heart of Nature
		once more. Arab idolatries, Syrian formulas, whatsoever
		was not equally real, had to go up in flame,&#8212;mere
		dead <em>fuel</em>, in various senses, for this which was <em>fire</em>.</p>

		<p class="post_thoughtbreak">It was during these wild warfarings and strugglings,
		especially after the Flight to Mecca, that Mahomet
		dictated at intervals his Sacred Book, which they name
		<i>Koran</i>, or <i>Reading</i>, &#8216;Thing to be read.&#8217; This is the
		Work he and his disciples made so much of, asking all
		the world, Is not that a miracle? The Mahometans
		regard their Koran with a reverence which few Christians
		pay even to their Bible. It is admitted everywhere
		as the standard of all law and all practice; the thing
		to be gone-upon in speculation and life: the message
		sent direct out of Heaven, which this Earth has to conform
		to, and walk by; the thing to be read. Their
		Judges decide by it; all Moslem are bound to study
		it, seek in it for the light of their life. They have
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page299" name="page299"></a>299</span>mosques where it is all read daily; thirty relays of
		priests take it up in succession, get through the whole
		each day. There, for twelve-hundred years, has the
		voice of this Book, at all moments, kept sounding
		through the ears and the hearts of so many men. We
		hear of Mahometan Doctors that had read it seventy-thousand
		times!</p>

		<p>Very curious: if one sought for &#8216;discrepancies of
		national taste,&#8217; here surely were the most eminent instance
		of that! We also can read the Koran; our
		Translation of it, by Sale, is known to be a very fair
		one. I must say, it is as toilsome reading as I ever
		undertook. A wearisome confused jumble, crude, incondite;
		endless iterations, long-windedness, entanglement;
		most crude, incondite;&#8212;insupportable stupidity,
		in short! Nothing but a sense of duty could carry any
		European through the Koran. We read in it, as we
		might in the State-Paper Office, unreadable masses of
		lumber, that perhaps we may get some glimpses of a
		remarkable man. It is true we have it under disadvantages:
		the Arabs see more method in it than we.
		Mahomet&#8217;s followers found the Koran lying all in
		fractions, as it had been written-down at first promulgation;
		much of it, they say, on shoulder-blades of
		mutton, flung pellmell into a chest: and they published
		it, without any discoverable order as to time or otherwise;&#8212;merely
		trying, as would seem, and this not very
		strictly, to put the longest chapters first. The real
		beginning of it, in that way, lies almost at the end:
		for the earliest portions were the shortest. Read in
		its historical sequence it perhaps would not be so bad.
		Much of it, too, they say, is rhythmic; a kind of wild
		chanting song, in the original. This may be a great
		point; much perhaps has been lost in the Translation
		here. Yet with every allowance, one feels it difficult
		to see how any mortal ever could consider this Koran
		as a Book written in Heaven, too good for the Earth;
		as a well-written book, or indeed as a <em>book</em> at all; and
		not a bewildered rhapsody; <em>written</em>, so far as writing
		goes, as badly as almost any book ever was. So much
		for national discrepancies, and the standard of taste.</p>

		<p>Yet I should say, it was not unintelligible how the
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page300" name="page300"></a>300</span>Arabs might so love it. When once you get this confused
		coil of a Koran fairly off your hands, and have it behind
		you at a distance, the essential type of it begins
		to disclose itself; and in this there is a merit quite
		other than the literary one. If a book come from the
		heart, it will contrive to reach other hearts; all art and
		authorcraft are of small amount to that. One would
		say the primary character of the Koran is that of its
		<em>genuineness</em>, of its being a <i>bonâ-fide</i> book. Prideaux,
		I know, and others have represented it as a mere bundle
		of juggleries; chapter after chapter got-up to excuse
		and varnish the author&#8217;s successive sins, forward his
		ambitions and quackeries: but really it is time to dismiss
		all that. I do not assert Mahomet&#8217;s continual
		sincerity: who is continually sincere? But I confess
		I can make nothing of the critic, in these times, who
		would accuse him of deceit <em>prepense</em>; of conscious deceit
		generally, or perhaps at all;&#8212;still more, of living in
		a mere element of conscious deceit, and writing this
		Koran as a forger and juggler would have done! Every
		candid eye, I think, will read the Koran far otherwise
		than so. It is the confused ferment of a great rude
		human soul; rude, untutored, that cannot even read;
		but fervent, earnest, struggling vehemently to utter
		itself in words. With a kind of breathless intensity he
		strives to utter himself; the thoughts crowd on him
		pellmell: for very multitude of things to say, he can
		get nothing said. The meaning that is in him shapes
		itself into no form of composition, is stated in no
		sequence, method, or coherence;&#8212;they are not <em>shaped</em>
		at all, these thoughts of his; flung-out unshaped, as
		they struggle and tumble there, in their chaotic inarticulate
		state. We said &#8216;stupid:&#8217; yet natural stupidity is
		by no means the character of Mahomet&#8217;s Book; it is
		natural uncultivation rather. The man has not studied
		speaking; in the haste and pressure of continual fighting,
		has not time to mature himself into fit speech.
		The panting breathless haste and vehemence of a man
		struggling in the thick of battle for life and salvation;
		this is the mood he is in! A headlong haste; for very
		magnitude of meaning, he cannot get himself articulated
		into words. The successive utterances of a soul in
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page301" name="page301"></a>301</span>that mood, coloured by the various vicissitudes of three-and-twenty
		years; now well uttered, now worse: this
		is the Koran.</p>

		<p>For we are to consider Mahomet, through these three-and-twenty
		years, as the centre of a world wholly in
		conflict. Battles with the Koreish and Heathen,
		quarrels among his own people, backslidings of his
		own wild heart; all this kept him in a perpetual whirl,
		his soul knowing rest no more. In wakeful nights, as
		one may fancy, the wild soul of the man, tossing amid
		these vortices, would hail any light of a decision for
		them as a veritable light from Heaven; <em>any</em> making-up
		of his mind, so blessed, indispensable for him there,
		would seem the inspiration of a Gabriel. Forger and
		juggler? No, no! This great fiery heart, seething,
		simmering like a great furnace of thoughts, was not a
		juggler&#8217;s. His life was a Fact to him; this God&#8217;s
		Universe an awful Fact and Reality. He has faults
		enough. The man was an uncultured semi-barbarous
		Son of Nature, much of the Bedouin still clinging to
		him: we must take him for that. But for a wretched
		Simulacrum, a hungry Impostor without eyes or heart,
		practising for a mess of pottage such blasphemous
		swindlery, forgery of celestial documents, continual
		high-treason against his Maker and Self, we will not
		and cannot take him.</p>

		<p>Sincerity, in all senses, seems to me the merit of
		the Koran; what had rendered it precious to the wild
		Arab men. It is, after all, the first and last merit in a
		book; gives rise to merits of all kinds,&#8212;nay, at bottom,
		it alone can give rise to merit of any kind. Curiously,
		through these incondite masses of tradition, vituperation,
		complaint, ejaculation in the Koran, a vein of
		true direct insight, of what we might almost call
		poetry, is found straggling. The body of the Book is
		made-up of mere tradition, and as it were vehement
		enthusiastic extempore preaching. He returns forever
		to the old stories of the Prophets as they went current
		in the Arab memory: how Prophet after Prophet, the
		Prophet Abraham, the Prophet Hud, the Prophet
		Moses, Christian and other real and fabulous Prophets,
		had come to this Tribe and to that, warning men of
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page302" name="page302"></a>302</span>their sin; and been received by them even as he Mahomet
		was,&#8212;which is a great solace to him. These things
		he repeats ten, perhaps twenty times; again and ever
		again with wearisome iteration; has never done repeating
		them. A brave Samuel Johnson, in his forlorn
		garret, might con-over the Biographies of Authors in
		that way! This is the great staple of the Koran. But
		curiously, through all this, comes ever and anon some
		glance as of the real thinker and seer. He has actually
		an eye for the world, this Mahomet: with a certain
		directness and rugged vigour, he brings home still, to
		our heart, the thing his own heart has been opened to. I
		make but little of his praises of Allah, which many
		praise; they are borrowed I suppose mainly from the
		Hebrew, at least they are far surpassed there. But the
		eye that flashes direct into the heart of things, and <em>sees</em>
		the truth of them; this is to me a highly interesting
		object. Great Nature&#8217;s own gift; which she bestows
		on all; but which only one in the thousand does not
		cast sorrowfully away: it is what I call sincerity of
		vision; the test of a sincere heart.</p>

		<p>Mahomet can work no miracles; he often answers
		impatiently: I can work no miracles. I? &#8216;I am a
		Public Preacher;&#8217; appointed to preach this doctrine to
		all creatures. Yet the world, as we can see, had really
		from of old been all one great miracle to him. Look
		over the world, says he; is it not wonderful, the work
		of Allah; wholly &#8216;a sign to you,&#8217; if your eyes were
		open! This Earth, God made it for you: &#8216;appointed
		paths in it;&#8217; you can live in it, go to and fro on it.&#8212;The
		clouds in the dry country of Arabia, to Mahomet
		they are very wonderful: Great clouds, he says, born
		in the deep bosom of the Upper Immensity, where do
		they come from! They hang there, the great black
		monsters; pour-down their rain deluges &#8216;to revive a
		dead earth,&#8217; and grass springs, and tall leafy palm-trees
		with their date-clusters hanging round. Is not that
		a sign?&#8217; Your cattle too,&#8212;Allah made them; serviceable
		dumb creatures; they change the grass into milk;
		you have your clothing from them, very strange
		creatures; they come ranking home at evening-time,
		&#8216;and,&#8217; adds he, &#8216;and are a credit to you!&#8217; Ships also,&#8212;he
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page303" name="page303"></a>303</span>talks often about ships: Huge moving mountains,
		they spread-out their cloth wings, go bounding through
		the water there, Heaven&#8217;s wind driving them; anon
		they lie motionless, God has withdrawn the wind, they
		lie dead, and cannot stir! Miracles? cries he; what
		miracle would you have? Are not you yourselves
		there? God made <em>you</em>, &#8216;shaped you out of a little
		clay.&#8217; Ye were small once; a few years ago ye were
		not at all. Ye have beauty, strength, thoughts, &#8216;ye
		have compassion on one another.&#8217; Old age comes-on
		you, and gray hairs; your strength fades into feebleness;
		ye sink down, and again are not. &#8216;Ye have
		compassion on one another:&#8217; this struck me much:
		Allah might have made you having no compassion on one
		another,&#8212;how had it been then! This is a great
		direct thought, a glance at first-hand into the very
		fact of things. Rude vestiges of poetic genius, of
		whatsoever is best and truest, are visible in this man.
		A strong untutored intellect: eyesight, heart; a strong
		wild man,&#8212;might have shaped himself into Poet, King,
		Priest, any kind of Hero.</p>

		<p>To his eyes it is forever clear that this world wholly
		is miraculous. He sees what, as we said once before,
		all great thinkers, the rude Scandinavians themselves,
		in one way or other, have contrived to see: That this
		so solid-looking material world is, at bottom, in very
		deed, Nothing; is a visual and tactual Manifestation
		of God&#8217;s power and presence,&#8212;a shadow hung-out by
		Him on the bosom of the void Infinite; nothing more.
		The Mountains, he says, these great rock-mountains,
		they shall dissipate themselves &#8216;like clouds;&#8217; melt into
		the Blue as clouds do, and not be! He figures the
		Earth, in the Arab fashion, Sale tells us, as an immense
		Plain or flat Plate of ground, the mountains are set
		on that to <em>steady</em> it. At the Last Day they shall disappear
		&#8216;like clouds;&#8217; the whole Earth shall go spinning,
		whirl itself off into wreck, and as dust and vapour
		vanish in the Inane. Allah withdraws his hand from
		it, and it ceases to be. The universal empire of Allah,
		presence everywhere of an unspeakable Power, a
		Splendour, and a Terror not to be named, as the true
		force, essence and reality, in all things whatsoever,
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page304" name="page304"></a>304</span>was continually clear to this man. What a modern
		talks-of by the name, Forces of Nature, Laws of
		Nature; and does not figure as a divine thing; not
		even as one thing at all, but as a set of things, undivine
		enough,&#8212;saleable, curious, good for propelling steamships!
		With our Sciences and Cyclopædias, we are
		apt to forget the <em>divineness</em>, in these laboratories of
		ours. We ought not to forget it! That once well forgotten,
		I know not what else were worth remembering.
		Most sciences, I think, were then a very dead thing;
		withered, contentious, empty;&#8212;a thistle in late autumn.
		The best science, without this, is but as the dead
		<em>timber</em>; it is not the growing tree and forest,&#8212;which
		gives ever-new timber, among other things! Man cannot
		<em>know</em> either, unless he can <em>worship</em> in some way.
		His knowledge is a pedantry, and dead thistle, otherwise.</p>

		<p>Much has been said and written about the sensuality
		of Mahomet&#8217;s Religion; more than was just. The indulgences,
		criminal to us, which he permitted, were not
		of his appointment; he found them practised, unquestioned
		from immemorial time in Arabia; what he did
		was to curtail them, restrict them, not on one but on
		many sides. His Religion is not an easy one: with rigorous
		fasts, lavations, strict complex formulas, prayers five
		times a day, and abstinence from wine, it did not
		&#8216;succeed by being an easy religion.&#8217; As if indeed any
		religion, or cause holding of religion, could succeed by
		that! It is a calumny on men to say that they are
		roused to heroic action by ease, hope of pleasure,
		recompense,&#8212;sugar-plums of any kind, in this world
		or the next! In the meanest mortal there lies something
		nobler. The poor swearing soldier, hired to be
		shot, has his &#8216;honour of a soldier,&#8217; different from drill-regulations
		and the shilling a day. It is not to taste
		sweet things, but to do noble and true things, and
		vindicate himself under God&#8217;s Heaven as a god-made
		Man, that the poorest son of Adam dimly longs. Show
		him the way of doing that, the dullest daydrudge kindles
		into a hero. They wrong man greatly who say he is to
		be seduced by ease. Difficulty, abnegation, martyrdom,
		death are the <em>allurements</em> that act on the heart of
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page305" name="page305"></a>305</span>man. Kindle the inner genial life of him, you have a
		flame that burns-up all lower considerations. Not
		happiness, but something higher: one sees this even in
		the frivolous classes, with their &#8216;point of honour&#8217; and
		the like. Not by flattering our appetites; no, by
		awakening the Heroic that slumbers in every heart, can
		any Religion gain followers.</p>

		<p>Mahomet himself, after all that can be said about him,
		was not a sensual man. We shall err widely if we
		consider this man as a common voluptuary, intent
		mainly on base enjoyments,&#8212;nay on enjoyments of any
		kind. His household was of the frugalest; his common
		diet barley-bread and water: sometimes for months
		there was not a fire once lighted on his hearth. They
		record with just pride that he would mend his own
		shoes, patch his own cloak. A poor, hard-toiling, ill-provided
		man; careless of what vulgar men toil for.
		Not a bad man, I should say; something better in him
		than <em>hunger</em> of any sort,&#8212;or these wild Arab men,
		fighting and jostling three-and-twenty years at his hand,
		in close contact with him always, would not have
		reverenced him so! They were wild men, bursting
		ever and anon into quarrel, into all kinds of fierce
		sincerity; without right worth and manhood, no man
		could have commanded them. They called him
		Prophet, you say? Why, he stood there face to face
		with them; bare, not enshrined in any mystery; visibly
		clouting his own cloak, cobbling his own shoes; fighting,
		counselling, ordering in the midst of them: they
		must have seen what kind of a man he <em>was</em>, let him
		be <em>called</em> what you like! No emperor with his tiaras
		was obeyed as this man in a cloak of his own clouting.
		During three-and-twenty years of rough actual trial.
		I find something of a veritable Hero necessary for that,
		of itself.</p>

		<p>His last words are a prayer; broken ejaculations of a
		heart struggling-up, in trembling hope, towards its
		Maker. We cannot say that his religion made him
		<em>worse</em>; it made him better; good, not bad. Generous
		things are recorded of him: when he lost his Daughter,
		the thing he answers is, in his own dialect, everyway
		sincere, and yet equivalent to that of Christians, &#8216;The
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page306" name="page306"></a>306</span>Lord giveth, and the Lord taketh away; blessed be the
		name of the Lord.&#8217; He answered in like manner of
		Seid, his emancipated well-beloved Slave, the second
		of the believers. Seid had fallen in the War of Tabûc,
		the first of Mahomet&#8217;s fightings with the Greeks.
		Mahomet said, It was well; Seid had done his Master&#8217;s
		work, Seid had now gone to his Master: it was all well
		with Seid. Yet Seid&#8217;s daughter found him weeping
		over the body;&#8212;the old gray-haired man melting in
		tears! &#8220;What do I see?&#8221; said she.&#8212;&#8220;You see a
		friend weeping over his friend.&#8221;&#8212;He went out for the
		last time into the mosque, two days before his death;
		asked, If he had injured any man? Let his own back
		bear the stripes. If he owed any man? A voice
		answered, &#8220;Yes, me three drachms,&#8221; borrowed on such
		an occasion. Mahomet ordered them to be paid:
		&#8220;Better be in shame now,&#8221; said he, &#8220;than at the Day
		of Judgment.&#8221;&#8212;You remember Kadijah, and the &#8220;No,
		by Allah!&#8221; Traits of that kind show us the genuine
		man, the brother of us all, brought visible through
		twelve centuries,&#8212;the veritable Son of our common
		Mother.</p>

		<p>Withal I like Mahomet for his total freedom from
		cant. He is a rough self-helping son of the wilderness;
		does not pretend to be what he is not. There is no
		ostentatious pride in him; but neither does he go much
		upon humility: he is there as he can be, in cloak and
		shoes of his own clouting; speaks plainly to all manner
		of Persian Kings, Greek Emperors, what it is they are
		bound to do; knows well enough, about himself, &#8216;the
		respect due unto thee.&#8217; In a life-and-death war with
		Bedouins, cruel things could not fail; but neither are
		acts of mercy, of noble natural pity and generosity
		wanting. Mahomet makes no apology for the one, no
		boast of the other. They were each the free dictate of
		his heart; each called-for, there and then. Not a
		mealy-mouthed man! A candid ferocity, if the case
		call for it, is in him; he does not mince matters! The
		War of Tabûc is a thing he often speaks of: his men
		refused, many of them, to march on that occasion:
		pleaded the heat of the weather, the harvest, and so
		forth; he can never forget that. Your harvest? It
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page307" name="page307"></a>307</span>lasts for a day. What will become of your harvest
		through all Eternity? Hot weather? Yes, it was hot;
		&#8216;but Hell will be hotter!&#8217; Sometimes a rough sarcasm
		turns-up: He says to the unbelievers, Ye shall have the
		just measure of your deeds at that Great Day. They
		will be weighed-out to you; ye shall not have short
		weight!&#8212;Everywhere he fixes the matter in his eye;
		he <em>sees</em> it: his heart, now and then, is as if struck
		dumb by the greatness of it. &#8216;Assuredly,&#8217; he says:
		that word, in the Koran, is written-down sometimes as
		a sentence by itself: &#8216;Assuredly.&#8217;</p>

		<p>No <i>Dilettantism</i> in this Mahomet; it is a business
		of Reprobation and Salvation with him, of Time and
		Eternity: he is in deadly earnest about it! Dilettantism,
		hypothesis, speculation, a kind of amateur-search
		for Truth, toying and coquetting with Truth: this is
		the sorest sin. The root of all other imaginable sins.
		It consists in the heart and soul of the man never having
		been <em>open</em> to Truth;&#8212;&#8216;living in a vain show.&#8217; Such
		a man not only utters and produces falsehoods, but <em>is</em>
		himself a falsehood. The rational moral principle,
		spark of the Divinity, is sunk deep in him, in quiet
		paralysis of life-death. The very falsehoods of
		Mahomet are truer than the truths of such a man.
		He is the insincere man: smooth-polished, respectable
		in some times and places: inoffensive, says nothing
		harsh to anybody; most <em>cleanly</em>,&#8212;just as carbonic acid
		is, which is death and poison.</p>

		<p>We will not praise Mahomet&#8217;s moral precepts as
		always of the superfinest sort; yet it can be said that
		there is always a tendency to good in them; that they
		are the true dictates of a heart aiming towards what
		is just and true. The sublime forgiveness of Christianity,
		turning of the other cheek when the one has been
		smitten, is not here: you <em>are</em> to revenge yourself, but
		it is to be in measure, not overmuch, or beyond justice.
		On the other hand, Islam, like any great Faith, and
		insight into the essence of man, is a perfect equaliser
		of men: the soul of one believer outweighs all earthly
		kingships; all men, according to Islam too, are equal.
		Mahomet insists not on the propriety of giving alms,
		but on the necessity of it; he marks-down by law how
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page308" name="page308"></a>308</span>much you are to give, and it is at your peril if you
		neglect. The tenth part of a man&#8217;s annual income,
		whatever that may be, is the <em>property</em> of the poor, of
		those that are afflicted and need help. Good all this:
		the natural voice of humanity, of pity and equity dwelling
		in the heart of this wild Son of Nature speaks <em>so</em>.</p>

		<p>Mahomet&#8217;s Paradise is sensual, his Hell sensual:
		true; in the one and the other there is enough that
		shocks all spiritual feeling in us. But we are to recollect
		that the Arabs already had it so; that Mahomet, in
		whatever he changed of it, softened and diminished all
		this. The worst sensualities, too, are the work of
		doctors, followers of his, not his work. In the Koran
		there is really very little said about the joys of Paradise;
		they are intimated rather than insisted on. Nor is it
		forgotten that the highest joys even there shall be
		spiritual; the pure Presence of the Highest, this shall
		infinitely transcend all other joys. He says, &#8216;Your
		salutation shall be, Peace.&#8217; <i>Salam</i>, Have Peace!&#8212;the
		thing that all rational souls long for, and seek, vainly
		here below, as the one blessing. &#8216;Ye shall sit on seats,
		facing one another: all grudges shall be taken away
		out of your hearts.&#8217; All grudges! Ye shall love one
		another freely; for each of you, in the eyes of his
		brothers, there will be Heaven enough!</p>

		<p>In reference to this of the sensual Paradise and
		Mahomet&#8217;s sensuality, the sorest chapter of all for us,
		there were many things to be said; which it is not convenient
		to enter upon here. Two remarks only I shall
		make, and therewith leave it to your candour. The
		first is furnished me by Goethe; it is a casual hint of
		his which seems well worth taking note of. In one of
		his Delineations, in <i>Meister&#8217;s Travels</i> it is, the hero
		comes-upon a Society of men with very strange ways,
		one of which was this: &#8220;We require,&#8221; says the
		Master, &#8220;that each of our people shall restrict himself
		in one direction,&#8221; shall go right against his desire in
		one matter, and <em>make</em> himself do the thing he does
		not wish, &#8220;should we allow him the greater latitude
		on all other sides.&#8221; There seems to me a great justness
		in this. Enjoying things which are pleasant; that
		is not the evil: it is the reducing of our moral self to
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page309" name="page309"></a>309</span>slavery by them that is. Let a man assert withal that
		he is king over his habitudes; that he could and would
		shake them off, on cause shown: this is an excellent
		law. The Month Ramadhan for the Moslem, much in
		Mahomet&#8217;s Religion, much in his own Life, bears in
		that direction; if not by forethought, or clear purpose
		of moral improvement on his part, then by a certain
		healthy manful instinct, which is as good.</p>

		<p>But there is another thing to be said about the
		Mahometan Heaven and Hell. This namely, that,
		however gross and material they may be, they are an
		emblem of an everlasting truth, not always so well
		remembered elsewhere. That gross sensual Paradise
		of his; that horrible flaming Hell; the great enormous
		Day of Judgment he perpetually insists on: what is all
		this but a rude shadow, in the rude Bedouin imagination,
		of that grand spiritual Fact, and Beginning of
		Facts, which it is ill for us too if we do not all know
		and feel: the Infinite Nature of Duty? That man&#8217;s
		actions here are of <em>infinite</em> moment to him, and never
		die or end at all; that man, with his little life, reaches
		upwards high as Heaven, downwards low as Hell, and
		in his threescore years of Time holds an Eternity fearfully
		and wonderfully hidden: all this had burnt itself,
		as in flame-characters, into the wild Arab soul. As
		in flame and lightning, it stands written there; awful,
		unspeakable, ever present to him. With bursting
		earnestness, with a fierce savage sincerity, halt, articulating,
		not able to articulate, he strives to speak it,
		bodies it forth in that Heaven and that Hell. Bodied
		forth in what way you will, it is the first of all truths.
		It is venerable under all embodiments. What is the
		chief end of man here below? Mahomet has answered
		this question, in a way that might put some of <em>us</em> to
		shame! He does not, like a Bentham, a Paley, take
		Right and Wrong, and calculate the profit and loss,
		ultimate pleasure of the one and of the other; and
		summing all up by addition and subtraction into a net
		result, ask you, Whether on the whole the Right does
		not preponderate considerably? No, it is not <em>better</em>
		to do the one than the other; the one is to the other as
		life is to death,&#8212;as Heaven is to Hell. The one must
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page310" name="page310"></a>310</span>in nowise be done, the other in nowise left undone.
		You shall not measure them; they are incommensurable:
		the one is death eternal to a man, the other is
		life eternal. Benthamee Utility, virtue by Profit and
		Loss; reducing this God&#8217;s-world to a dead brute Steam-engine,
		the infinite celestial Soul of Man to a kind of
		Hay-balance for weighing hay and thistles on, pleasures
		and pains on:&#8212;If you ask me which gives, Mahomet
		or they, the beggarlier and falser view of Man and his
		Destinies in this Universe, I will answer, It is not
		Mahomet!&#8212;&#8212;</p>

		<p>On the whole, we will repeat that this Religion of
		Mahomet&#8217;s is a kind of Christianity; has a genuine
		element of what is spiritually highest looking through
		it, not to be hidden by all its imperfections. The Scandinavian
		God <i>Wish</i>, the god of all rude men,&#8212;this has
		been enlarged into a Heaven by Mahomet; but a
		Heaven symbolical of sacred Duty, and to be earned
		by faith and welldoing, by valiant action, and a divine
		patience which is still more valiant. It is Scandinavian
		Paganism, and a truly celestial element superadded to
		that. Call it not false; look not at the falsehood of it,
		look at the truth of it. For these twelve centuries, it
		has been the religion and life-guidance of the fifth
		part of the whole kindred of Mankind. Above all
		things, it has been a religion heartily <em>believed</em>. These
		Arabs believe their religion, and try to live by it! No
		Christians, since the early ages, or only perhaps the
		English Puritans in modern times, have ever stood by
		their Faith as the Moslem do by theirs,&#8212;believing it
		wholly, fronting Time with it, and Eternity with it.
		This night the watchman on the streets of Cairo when
		he cries &#8220;Who goes?&#8221; will hear from the passenger,
		along with his answer, &#8220;There is no God but God.&#8221;
		<i>Allah akbar, Islam</i>, sounds through the souls, and whole
		daily existence, of these dusky millions. Zealous
		missionaries preach it abroad among Malays, black
		Papuans, brutal Idolaters;&#8212;displacing what is worse,
		nothing that is better or good.</p>

		<p>To the Arab Nation it was as a birth from darkness
		into light; Arabia first became alive by means of it. A
		poor shepherd people, roaming unnoticed in its deserts
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page311" name="page311"></a>311</span>since the creation of the world: a Hero-Prophet was
		sent down to them with a word they could believe:
		see, the unnoticed becomes world-notable, the small
		has grown world-great; within one century afterwards,
		Arabia is at Grenada on this hand, at Delhi on that;&#8212;glancing
		in valour and splendour and the light of
		genius, Arabia shines through long ages over a great
		section of the world. Belief is great, life-giving. The
		history of a Nation becomes fruitful, soul-elevating,
		great, so soon as it believes. These Arabs, the man
		Mahomet, and that one century,&#8212;is it not as if a spark
		had fallen, one spark, on a world of what seemed black
		unnoticeable sand; but lo, the sand proves explosive
		powder, blazes heaven-high from Delhi to Grenada! I
		said, the Great Man was always as lightning out of
		Heaven; the rest of men waited for him like fuel, and
		then they too would flame.</p>

	</div>
	<div id="lectureiii" class="lecture">
		<p class="lecture_head">LECTURE III</p>

		<h3 class="lecture_title">THE HERO AS POET. DANTE; SHAKSPEARE.</h3>

		<p class="lecture_date">[Tuesday, 12th May 1840]</p>

		<p><span class="first_word">The</span> Hero as Divinity, the Hero as Prophet, are productions
		of old ages; not to be repeated in the new.
		They presuppose a certain rudeness of conception,
		which the progress of mere scientific knowledge puts
		an end to. There needs to be, as it were, a world
		vacant, or almost vacant of scientific forms, if men in
		their loving wonder are to fancy their fellow-man either
		a god or one speaking with the voice of a god. Divinity
		and Prophet are past. We are now to see our Hero in
		the less ambitious, but also less questionable, character
		of Poet; a character which does not pass. The Poet is
		a heroic figure belonging to all ages; whom all ages
		possess, when once he is produced, whom the newest
		age as the oldest may produce;&#8212;and will produce,
		always when Nature pleases. Let Nature send a Hero-soul;
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page312" name="page312"></a>312</span>in no age is it other than possible that he may
		be shaped into a Poet.</p>

		<p>Hero, Prophet, Poet,&#8212;many different names, in
		different times and places, do we give to Great Men;
		according to varieties we note in them, according to the
		sphere in which they have displayed themselves! We
		might give many more names, on this same principle.
		I will remark again, however, as a fact not unimportant
		to be understood, that the different <em>sphere</em> constitutes
		the grand origin of such distinction; that the Hero can
		be Poet, Prophet, King, Priest or what you will, according
		to the kind of world he finds himself born into. I
		confess, I have no notion of a truly great man that
		could not be <em>all</em> sorts of men. The Poet who could
		merely sit on a chair, and compose stanzas, would never
		make a stanza worth much. He could not sing the
		Heroic warrior, unless he himself were at least a Heroic
		warrior too. I fancy there is in him the Politician,
		the Thinker, Legislator, Philosopher;&#8212;in one or the
		other degree, he could have been, he is all these. So
		too I cannot understand how a Mirabeau, with that
		great glowing heart, with the fire that was in it, with
		the bursting tears that were in it, could not have written
		verses, tragedies, poems, touched all hearts in that way,
		had his course of life and education led him thitherward.
		The grand fundamental character is that of
		Great Man; that the man be great. Napoleon has
		words in him which are like Austerlitz Battles. Louis
		Fourteenth&#8217;s Marshals are a kind of poetical men
		withal; the things Turenne says are full of sagacity and
		geniality, like sayings of Samuel Johnson. The great
		heart, the clear deep-seeing eye: there it lies; no man
		whatever, in what province soever, can prosper at all
		without these. Petrarch and Boccaccio did diplomatic
		messages, it seems, quite well: one can easily believe it;
		they had done things a little harder than these! Burns,
		a gifted song-writer, might have made a still better
		Mirabeau. Shakspeare,&#8212;one knows not what <em>he</em> could
		not have made, in the supreme degree.</p>

		<p>True, there are aptitudes of Nature too. Nature does
		not make all great men, more than all other men, in
		the self-same mould. Varieties of aptitude doubtless;
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page313" name="page313"></a>313</span>but infinitely more of circumstance; and far oftenest
		it is the <em>latter</em> only that are looked to. But it is as
		with common men in the learning of trades. You take
		any man, as yet a vague capability of a man, who could
		be any kind of craftsman; and make him into a smith,
		a carpenter, a mason: he is then and thenceforth that
		and nothing else. And if, as Addison complains, you
		sometimes see a street-porter staggering under his load
		on spindle-shanks, and near at hand a tailor with the
		frame of a Samson handling a bit of cloth and small
		Whitechapel needle,&#8212;it cannot be considered that
		aptitude of Nature alone has been consulted here either!&#8212;The
		Great Man also, to what shall he be bound
		apprentice? Given your Hero, is he to become Conqueror,
		King, Philosopher, Poet? It is an inexplicably
		complex controversial-calculation between the world
		and him! He will read the world and its laws; the
		world with its laws will be there to be read. What the
		world, on <em>this</em> matter, shall permit and bid is, as we
		said, the most important fact about the world.&#8212;</p>

		<p class="post_thoughtbreak">Poet and Prophet differ greatly in our loose modern
		notions of them. In some old languages, again, the
		titles are synonymous; <i>Vates</i> means both Prophet and
		Poet: and indeed at all times, Prophet and Poet, well
		understood, have much kindred of meaning. Fundamentally
		indeed they are still the same; in this most
		important respect especially, That they have penetrated
		both of them into the sacred mystery of the Universe;
		what Goethe calls &#8216;the open secret.&#8217; &#8220;Which is the
		great secret?&#8221; asks one.&#8212;&#8220;The <em>open</em> secret,&#8221;&#8212;open
		to all, seen by almost none! That divine mystery,
		which lies everywhere in all Beings, &#8216;the Divine Idea
		of the World, that which lies at the bottom of Appearance,&#8217;
		as Fichte styles it; of which all Appearance,
		from the starry sky to the grass of the field, but
		especially the Appearance of Man and his work, is but
		the <i>vesture</i>, the embodiment that renders it visible.
		This divine mystery <em>is</em> in all times and in all places;
		veritably is. In most times and places it is greatly
		overlooked; and the Universe, definable always in one
		or the other dialect, as the realised Thought of God,
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page314" name="page314"></a>314</span>is considered a trivial, inert, commonplace matter,&#8212;as
		if, says the Satirist, it were a dead thing, which some
		upholsterer had put together! It could do no good
		at present, to <em>speak</em> much about this; but it is a pity
		for every one of us if we do not know it, live ever in
		the knowledge of it. Really a most mournful pity;&#8212;a
		failure to live at all, if we live otherwise!</p>

		<p>But now, I say, whoever may forget this divine
		mystery, the <i>Vates</i>, whether Prophet or Poet, has penetrated
		into it; is a man sent hither to make it more
		impressively known to us. That always is his message;
		he is to reveal that to us,&#8212;that sacred mystery which
		he more than others lives ever present with. While
		others forget it, he knows it;&#8212;I might say, he has
		been driven to know it; without consent asked of <em>him</em>,
		he finds himself living in it, bound to live in it. Once
		more, here is no Hearsay, but a direct Insight and
		Belief; this man too could not help being a sincere
		man! Whosoever may live in the shows of things, it
		is for him a necessity of nature to live in the very fact
		of things. A man once more, in earnest with the
		Universe, though all others were but toying with it.
		He is a <i>Vates</i>, first of all, in virtue of being sincere.
		So far Poet and Prophet, participators in the &#8216;open
		secret,&#8217; are one.</p>

		<p>With respect to their distinction again: The <i>Vates</i>
		Prophet, we might say, has seized that sacred mystery
		rather on the moral side, as Good and Evil, Duty and
		Prohibition; the <i>Vates</i> Poet on what the Germans call
		the æsthetic side, as Beautiful, and the like. The one
		we may call a revealer of what we are to do, the other
		of what we are to love. But indeed these two provinces
		run into one another, and cannot be disjoined. The
		Prophet too has his eye on what we are to love: how
		else shall he know what it is we are to do? The highest
		Voice ever heard on this earth said withal, &#8220;Consider
		the lilies of the field; they toil not, neither do they spin:
		yet Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one
		of these.&#8221; A glance, that, into the deepest deep of
		Beauty. &#8216;The lilies of the field,&#8217;&#8212;dressed finer than
		earthly princes, springing-up there in the humble
		furrow-field; a beautiful <em>eye</em> looking-out on you, from
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page315" name="page315"></a>315</span>the great inner Sea of Beauty! How could the rude
		Earth make these, if her Essence, rugged as she looks
		and is, were not inwardly Beauty? In this point of
		view, too, a saying of Goethe&#8217;s, which has staggered
		several, may have meaning: &#8216;The Beautiful,&#8217; he
		intimates, &#8216;is higher than the Good: the Beautiful includes
		in it the Good.&#8217; The <em>true</em> Beautiful; which
		however, I have said somewhere, &#8216;differs from the <em>false</em>
		as Heaven does from Vauxhall!&#8217; So much for the
		distinction and identity of Poet and Prophet.&#8212;</p>

		<p>In ancient and also in modern periods we find a few
		Poets who are accounted perfect; whom it were a kind
		of treason to find fault with. This is noteworthy;
		this is right: yet in strictness it is only an illusion.
		At bottom, clearly enough, there is no perfect Poet!
		A vein of Poetry exists in the hearts of all men; no
		man is made altogether of Poetry. We are all poets
		when we <em>read</em> a poem well. The &#8216;imagination that
		shudders at the Hell of Dante,&#8217; is not that the same
		faculty, weaker in degree, as Dante&#8217;s own? No one
		but Shakspeare can embody, out of <i>Saxo Grammaticus</i>,
		the story of <i>Hamlet</i> as Shakspeare did: but every one
		models some kind of story out of it; every one embodies
		it better or worse. We need not spend time in defining.
		Where there is no specific difference, as between round
		and square, all definition must be more or less arbitrary.
		A man that has <em>so</em> much more of the poetic element
		developed in him as to have become noticeable, will
		be called Poet by his neighbours. World-Poets too,
		those whom we are to take for perfect Poets, are settled
		by critics in the same way. One who rises <em>so</em> far above
		the general level of Poets will, to such and such critics,
		seem a Universal Poet; as he ought to do. And yet it
		is, and must be, an arbitrary distinction. All Poets,
		all men, have some touches of the Universal; no man
		is wholly made of that. Most Poets are very soon
		forgotten: but not the noblest Shakspeare or Homer of
		them can be remembered <em>forever</em>;&#8212;a day comes when
		he too is not!</p>

		<p>Nevertheless, you will say, there must be a difference
		between true Poetry and true Speech not poetical: what
		is the difference? On this point many things have been
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page316" name="page316"></a>316</span>written, especially by late German Critics, some of
		which are not very intelligible at first. They say, for
		example, that the Poet has an <em>infinitude</em> in him; communicates
		an <i>Unendlichkeit</i>, a certain character of
		&#8216;infinitude,&#8217; to whatsoever he delineates. This, though
		not very precise, yet on so vague a matter is worth
		remembering: if well meditated, some meaning will
		gradually be found in it. For my own part, I find considerable
		meaning in the old vulgar distinction of Poetry
		being <em>metrical</em>, having music in it, being a Song. Truly,
		if pressed to give a definition, one might say this as
		soon as anything else: If your delineation be authentically
		<em>musical</em>, musical, not in word only, but in heart
		and substance, in all the thoughts and utterances of
		it, in the whole conception of it, then it will be poetical;
		if not, not.&#8212;Musical: how much lies in that! A
		<em>musical</em> thought is one spoken by a mind that has penetrated
		into the inmost heart of the thing; detected the
		inmost mystery of it, namely the <em>melody</em> that lies hidden
		in it; the inward harmony of coherence which is its
		soul, whereby it exists, and has a right to be, here in
		this world. All inmost things, we may say, are
		melodious; naturally utter themselves in Song. The
		meaning of Song goes deep. Who is there that, in
		logical words, can express the effect music has on us?
		A kind of inarticulate unfathomable speech, which
		leads us to the edge of the Infinite, and lets us for
		moments gaze into that!</p>

		<p>Nay all speech, even the commonest speech, has
		something of song in it: not a parish in the world but
		has its parish-accent;&#8212;the rhythm or <em>tune</em> to which the
		people there <em>sing</em> what they have to say! Accent is
		a kind of chanting; all men have accent of their own,&#8212;though
		they only <em>notice</em> that of others. Observe too
		how all passionate language does of itself become
		musical,&#8212;with a finer music than the mere accent; the
		speech of a man even in zealous anger becomes a chant,
		a song. All deep things are Song. It seems somehow
		the very central essence of us, Song; as if all the rest
		were but wrappages and hulls! The primal element
		of us; of us, and of all things. The Greeks fabled of
		Sphere-Harmonies; it was the feeling they had of the
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page317" name="page317"></a>317</span>inner structure of Nature; that the soul of all her voices
		and utterances was perfect music. Poetry, therefore,
		we will call <em>musical Thought</em>. The Poet is he who
		<em>thinks</em> in that manner. At bottom, it turns still on
		power of intellect; it is a man&#8217;s sincerity and depth of
		vision that makes him a Poet. See deep enough, and
		you see musically; the heart of Nature <em>being</em> everywhere
		music, if you can only reach it.</p>

		<p>The <i>Vates</i> Poet, with his melodious Apocalypse of
		Nature, seems to hold a poor rank among us, in comparison
		with the <i>Vates</i> Prophet; his function, and our
		esteem of him for his function, alike slight. The Hero
		taken as Divinity; the Hero taken as Prophet; then
		next the Hero taken only as Poet: does it not look
		as if our estimate of the Great Man, epoch after epoch,
		were continually diminishing? We take him first for
		a god, then for one god-inspired; and now in the next
		stage of it, his most miraculous word gains from us only
		the recognition that he is a Poet, beautiful verse-maker,
		man of genius, or suchlike!&#8212;It looks so; but I persuade
		myself that intrinsically it is not so. If we consider
		well, it will perhaps appear that in man still there is the
		<em>same</em> altogether peculiar admiration for the Heroic Gift,
		by what name soever called, that there at any time was.</p>

		<p>I should say, if we do not now reckon a Great Man
		literally divine, it is that our notions of God, of the
		supreme unattainable Fountain of Splendour, Wisdom
		and Heroism, are ever rising <em>higher</em>; not altogether that
		our reverence for these qualities, as manifested in our
		like, is getting lower. This is worth taking thought of.
		Sceptical Dilettantism, the curse of these ages, a curse
		which will not last forever, does indeed in this the
		highest province of human things, as in all provinces,
		make sad work; and our reverence for great men, all
		crippled, blinded, paralytic as it is, comes out in poor
		plight, hardly recognisable. Men worship the shows of
		great men; the most disbelieve that there is any reality
		of great men to worship. The dreariest, fatalest faith;
		believing which, one would literally despair of human
		things. Nevertheless look, for example, at Napoleon!
		A Corsican lieutenant of artillery; that is the show of
		<em>him</em>: yet is he not obeyed, <em>worshipped</em> after his sort, as
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page318" name="page318"></a>318</span>all the Tiaraed and Diademed of the world put together
		could not be? High Duchesses, and ostlers of inns,
		gather round the Scottish rustic, Burns;&#8212;a strange
		feeling dwelling in each that they had never heard a
		man like this; that, on the whole, this is the man! In
		the secret heart of these people it still dimly reveals
		itself, though there is no accredited way of uttering it
		at present, that this rustic, with his black brows and
		flashing sun-eyes, and strange words moving laughter
		and tears, is of a dignity far beyond all others, incommensurable
		with all others. Do not we feel it so? But
		now, were Dilettantism, Scepticism, Triviality, and all
		that sorrowful brood, cast-out of us,&#8212;as, by God&#8217;s
		blessing, they shall one day be; were faith in the shows
		of things entirely swept-out, replaced by clear faith in
		the <em>things</em>, so that a man acted on the impulse of that
		only, and counted the other non-extant; what a new
		livelier feeling towards this Burns were it!</p>

		<p>Nay here in these pages, such as they are, have we
		not two mere Poets, if not deified, yet we may say
		beatified? Shakspeare and Dante are Saints of Poetry;
		really, if we will think of it, <em>canonised</em>, so that it is
		impiety to meddle with them. The unguided instinct of
		the world, working across all these perverse impediments,
		has arrived at such result. Dante and Shakspeare
		are a peculiar Two. They dwell apart, in a kind
		of royal solitude; none equal, none second to them: in
		the general feeling of the world, a certain transcendentalism,
		a glory as of complete perfection, invests these
		two. They <em>are</em> canonised, though no Pope or Cardinals
		took hand in doing it! Such, in spite of every perverting
		influence, in the most unheroic times, is still our
		indestructible reverence for heroism.&#8212;We will look a
		little at these Two, the Poet Dante and the Poet Shakspeare:
		what little it is permitted us to say here of the
		Hero as Poet will most fitly arrange itself in that
		fashion.</p>

		<p class="post_thoughtbreak">Many volumes have been written by way of commentary
		on Dante and his Book; yet, on the whole, with
		no great result. His Biography is, as it were, irrecoverably
		lost for us. An unimportant, wandering,
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page319" name="page319"></a>319</span>sorrowstricken man, not much note was taken of him
		while he lived; and the most of that has vanished, in
		the long space that now intervenes. It is five centuries
		since he ceased writing and living here. After all commentaries,
		the Book itself is mainly what we know of
		him. The Book;&#8212;and one might add that Portrait
		commonly attributed to Giotto, which, looking on it,
		you cannot help inclining to think genuine, whoever did
		it. To me it is a most touching face; perhaps of all
		faces that I know, the most so. Lonely there, painted
		as on vacancy, with the simple laurel wound round it;
		the deathless sorrow and pain, the known victory which
		is also deathless;&#8212;significant of the whole history of
		Dante! I think it is the mournfulest face that ever
		was painted from reality; an altogether tragic, heart-affecting
		face. There is in it, as foundation of it, the
		softness, tenderness, gentle affection as of a child; but
		all this is as if congealed into sharp contradiction, into
		abnegation, isolation, proud hopeless pain. A soft
		ethereal soul looking-out so stern, implacable, grim-trenchant,
		as from imprisonment of thick-ribbed ice!
		Withal it is a silent pain too, a silent scornful one: the
		lip is curled in a kind of godlike disdain of the thing
		that is eating-out his heart,&#8212;as if it were withal a mean
		insignificant thing, as if he whom it had power to
		torture and strangle were greater than it. The face of
		one wholly in protest, and life-long unsurrendering
		battle, against the world. Affection all converted into
		indignation: an implacable indignation; slow, equable,
		silent, like that of a god! The eye too, it looks-out
		as in a kind of <em>surprise</em>, a kind of inquiry, Why the
		world was of such a sort? This is Dante: so he looks,
		this &#8216;voice of ten silent centuries,&#8217; and sings us &#8216;his
		mystic unfathomable song.&#8217;</p>

		<p>The little that we know of Dante&#8217;s Life corresponds
		well enough with this Portrait and this Book. He was
		born at Florence, in the upper class of society, in the
		year 1265. His education was the best then going;
		much school-divinity, Aristotelean logic, some Latin
		classics,&#8212;no inconsiderable insight into certain provinces
		of things: and Dante, with his earnest intelligent
		nature, we need not doubt, learned better than
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page320" name="page320"></a>320</span>most all that was learnable. He has a clear cultivated
		understanding, and of great subtlety; the best fruit of
		education he had contrived to realise from these
		scholastics. He knows accurately and well what lies
		close to him; but, in such a time, without printed books
		or free intercourse, he could not know well what was
		distant: the small clear light, most luminous for what
		is near, breaks itself into singular <i>chiaroscuro</i> striking
		on what is far off. This was Dante&#8217;s learning from
		the schools. In life, he had gone through the usual
		destinies; been twice out campaigning as a soldier for
		the Florentine State, been on embassy; had in his
		thirty-fifth year, by natural gradation of talent and
		service, become one of the Chief Magistrates of
		Florence. He had met in boyhood a certain Beatrice
		Portinari, a beautiful little girl of his own age and
		rank, and grown-up thenceforth in partial sight of her,
		in some distant intercourse with her. All readers know
		his graceful affecting account of this; and then of their
		being parted; of her being wedded to another, and of
		her death soon after. She makes a great figure in
		Dante&#8217;s Poem; seems to have made a great figure in
		his life. Of all beings it might seem as if she, held
		apart from him, far apart at last in the dim Eternity,
		were the only one he had ever with his whole strength
		of affection loved. She died: Dante himself was
		wedded; but it seems not happily, far from happily.
		I fancy, the rigorous earnest man, with his keen excitabilities,
		was not altogether easy to make happy.</p>

		<p>We will not complain of Dante&#8217;s miseries: had all
		gone right with him as he wished it, he might have
		been Prior, Podestà, or whatsoever they call it, of
		Florence, well accepted among neighbours,&#8212;and the
		world had wanted one of the most notable words ever
		spoken or sung. Florence would have had another
		prosperous Lord Mayor; and the ten dumb centuries
		continued voiceless, and the ten other listening centuries
		(for there will be ten of them and more) had no <i>Divina
		Commedia</i> to hear! We will complain of nothing. A
		nobler destiny was appointed for this Dante; and he,
		struggling like a man led towards death and crucifixion,
		could not help fulfilling it. Give <em>him</em> the choice of his
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page321" name="page321"></a>321</span>happiness! He knew not, more than we do, what was
		really happy, what was really miserable.</p>

		<p>In Dante&#8217;s Priorship, the Guelf-Ghibelline, Bianchi-Neri,
		or some other confused disturbance rose to such
		a height, that Dante, whose party had seemed the
		stronger, was with his friends cast unexpectedly forth
		into banishment; doomed thenceforth to a life of woe
		and wandering. His property was all confiscated and
		more; he had the fiercest feeling that it was entirely
		unjust, nefarious in the sight of God and man. He
		tried what was in him to get reinstated; tried even by
		warlike surprisal, with arms in his hand: but it would
		not do; bad only had become worse. There is a record,
		I believe, still extant in the Florence Archives, dooming
		this Dante, wheresoever caught, to be burnt alive.
		Burnt alive; so it stands, they say: a very curious
		civic document. Another curious document, some considerable
		number of years later, is a Letter of Dante&#8217;s
		to the Florentine Magistrates, written in answer to a
		milder proposal of theirs, that he should return on
		condition of apologising and paying a fine. He
		answers, with fixed stern pride: &#8220;If I cannot return
		without calling myself guilty, I will never return,
		<i>nunquam revertar</i>.&#8221;</p>

		<p>For Dante there was now no home in this world.
		He wandered from patron to patron, from place to
		place; proving in his own bitter words, &#8216;How hard
		is the path, <i>Come è duro calle</i>.&#8217; The wretched are not
		cheerful company. Dante, poor and banished, with his
		proud earnest nature, with his moody humours, was
		not a man to conciliate men. Petrarch reports of him
		that being at Can della Scala&#8217;s court, and blamed one
		day for his gloom and taciturnity, he answered in no
		courtier-like way. Della Scala stood among his
		courtiers, with mimes and buffoons (<i>nebulones ac histriones</i>)
		making him heartily merry; when turning to
		Dante, he said: &#8220;Is it not strange, now, that this poor
		fool should make himself so entertaining; while you,
		a wise man, sit there day after day, and have nothing
		to amuse us with at all?&#8221; Dante answered bitterly:
		&#8220;No, not strange; your Highness is to recollect the
		Proverb, <i>Like to Like</i>;&#8221;&#8212;given the amuser, the amusee
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page322" name="page322"></a>322</span>must also be given! Such a man, with his proud silent
		ways, with his sarcasms and sorrows, was not made to
		succeed at court. By degrees, it came to be evident
		to him that he had no longer any resting-place, or hope
		of benefit, in this earth. The earthly world had cast
		him forth, to wander, wander; no living heart to love
		him now; for his sore miseries there was no solace
		here.</p>

		<p>The deeper naturally would the Eternal World impress
		itself on him; that awful reality over which, after
		all, this Time-world, with its Florences and banishments,
		only flutters as an unreal shadow. Florence
		thou shalt never see: but Hell and Purgatory and
		Heaven thou shalt surely see! What is Florence, Can
		della Scala, and the World and Life altogether?
		<span class="special_emphasis">Eternity</span>: thither, of a truth, not elsewhither, art thou
		and all things bound! The great soul of Dante, homeless
		on earth, made its home more and more in that
		awful other world. Naturally his thoughts brooded on
		that, as on the one fact important for him. Bodied
		or bodiless, it is the one fact important for all men:&#8212;but
		to Dante, in that age, it was bodied in fixed certainty
		of scientific shape; he no more doubted of that <i>Malebolge</i>
		Pool, that it all lay there with its gloomy circles,
		with its <i>alti guai</i>, and that he himself should see it,
		than we doubt that we should see Constantinople if
		we went thither. Dante&#8217;s heart, long filled with this,
		brooding over it in speechless thought and awe, bursts
		forth at length into &#8216;mystic unfathomable song;&#8217; and
		this his <i>Divine Comedy</i>, the most remarkable of all
		modern Books, is the result.</p>

		<p>It must have been a great solacement to Dante, and
		was, as we can see, a proud thought for him at times,
		That he, here in exile, could do this work; that no
		Florence, nor no man or men, could hinder him from
		doing it, or even much help him in doing it. He knew
		too, partly, that it was great; the greatest a man
		could do. &#8216;If thou follow thy star, <i>Se tu segui tua
		stella</i>,&#8217;&#8212;so could the Hero, in his forsakenness, in his
		extreme need, still say to himself: &#8220;Follow thou thy
		star, thou shalt not fail of a glorious haven!&#8221; The
		labour of writing, we find, and indeed could know
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page323" name="page323"></a>323</span>otherwise, was great and painful for him; he says,
		This Book, &#8216;which has made me lean for many years.&#8217;
		Ah yes, it was won, all of it, with pain and sore toil,&#8212;not
		in sport, but in grim earnest. His Book, as indeed
		most good Books are, has been written, in many senses,
		with his heart&#8217;s blood. It is his whole history, this
		Book. He died after finishing it; not yet very old,
		at the age of fifty-six;&#8212;broken-hearted rather, as is
		said. He lies buried in his death-city Ravenna: <i>Hic
		claudor Dantes patriis extorris ab oris.</i> The Florentines
		begged back his body, in a century after; the
		Ravenna people would not give it. &#8220;Here am I Dante
		laid, shut-out from my native shores.&#8221;</p>

		<p>I said, Dante&#8217;s Poem was a Song: it is Tieck who
		calls it &#8216;a mystic unfathomable Song;&#8217; and such is
		literally the character of it. Coleridge remarks very
		pertinently somewhere, that wherever you find a
		sentence musically worded, of true rhythm and melody
		in the words, there is something deep and good in the
		meaning too. For body and soul, word and idea, go
		strangely together here as everywhere. Song: we said
		before, it was the Heroic of Speech! All <em>old</em> Poems,
		Homer&#8217;s and the rest, are authentically Songs. I
		would say, in strictness, that all right Poems are; that
		whatsoever is not <em>sung</em> is properly no Poem, but a piece
		of Prose cramped into jingling lines,&#8212;to the great
		injury of the grammar, to the great grief of the reader,
		for most part! What we want to get at is the <em>thought</em>
		the man had, if he had any: why should he twist it into
		jingle, if he <em>could</em> speak it out plainly? It is only when
		the heart of him is rapt into true passion of melody,
		and the very tones of him, according to Coleridge&#8217;s
		remark, become musical by the greatness, depth and
		music of his thoughts, that we can give him right to
		rhyme and sing; that we call him a Poet, and listen
		to him as the Heroic of Speakers,&#8212;whose speech <em>is</em>
		Song. Pretenders to this are many; and to an earnest
		reader, I doubt, it is for most part a very melancholy,
		not to say an insupportable business, that of reading
		rhyme! Rhyme that had no inward necessity to be
		rhymed;&#8212;it ought to have told us plainly, without any
		jingle, what it was aiming at. I would advise all men
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page324" name="page324"></a>324</span>who <em>can</em> speak their thought, not to sing it; to understand
		that, in a serious time, among serious men, there
		is no vocation in them for singing it. Precisely as we
		love the true song, and are charmed by it as by something
		divine, so shall we hate the false song, and
		account it a mere wooden noise, a thing hollow, superfluous,
		altogether an insincere and offensive thing.</p>

		<p>I give Dante my highest praise when I say of his
		<i>Divine Comedy</i> that it is, in all senses, genuinely a
		Song. In the very sound of it there is a <i>canto fermo</i>;
		it proceeds as by a chant. The language, his simple
		<i>terza rima</i>, doubtless helped him in this. One reads
		along naturally with a sort of <em>lilt</em>. But I add, that it
		could not be otherwise; for the essence and material
		of the work are themselves rhythmic. Its depth, and
		rapt passion and sincerity, makes its musical;&#8212;go <em>deep</em>
		enough, there is music everywhere. A true inward
		symmetry, what one calls an architectural harmony,
		reigns in it, proportionates it all: architectural; which
		also partakes of the character of music. The three
		kingdoms, <i>Inferno</i>, <i>Purgatorio</i>, <i>Paradiso</i>, look-out on
		one another like compartments of a great edifice; a
		great supernatural world-cathedral, piled-up there,
		stern, solemn, awful; Dante&#8217;s World of Souls! It is,
		at bottom, the <em>sincerest</em> of all Poems; sincerity, here
		too, we find to be the measure of worth. It came deep
		out of the author&#8217;s heart of hearts; and it goes deep,
		and through long generations, into ours. The people
		of Verona, when they saw him on the streets, used to
		say, &#8220;<i>Eccovi l&#8217; uom ch&#8217; è stato all&#8217; Inferno</i>, See, there
		is the man that was in Hell!&#8221; Ah, yes, he had been in
		Hell;&#8212;in Hell enough, in long severe sorrow and
		struggle; as the like of him is pretty sure to have been.
		Commedias that come-out <em>divine</em> are not accomplished
		otherwise. Thought, true labour of any kind, highest
		virtue itself, is it not the daughter of Pain? Born as
		out of the black whirlwind;&#8212;true <em>effort</em>, in fact, as of
		a captive struggling to free himself: that is Thought.
		In all ways we are &#8216;to become perfect through <em>suffering</em>.&#8217;&#8212;But,
		as I say, no work known to me is so elaborated
		as this of Dante&#8217;s. It has all been as if molten, in
		the hottest furnace of his soul. It had made him &#8216;lean&#8217;
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page325" name="page325"></a>325</span>for many years. Not the general whole only; every
		compartment of it is worked-out, with intense earnestness,
		into truth, into clear visuality. Each answers to
		the other; each fits in its place, like a marble stone
		accurately hewn and polished. It is the soul of Dante,
		and in this the soul of the middle ages, rendered forever
		rhythmically visible there. No light task; a right
		intense one: but a task which is <em>done</em>.</p>

		<p>Perhaps one would say, <em>intensity</em>, with the much that
		depends on it, is the prevailing character of Dante&#8217;s
		genius. Dante does not come before us as a large
		catholic mind; rather as a narrow and even sectarian
		mind: it is partly the fruit of his age and position, but
		partly too of his own nature. His greatness has, in all
		senses, concentered itself into fiery emphasis and depth.
		He is world-great not because he is world-wide, but
		because he is world-deep. Through all objects he
		pierces as it were down into the heart of Being. I
		know nothing so intense as Dante. Consider, for example,
		to begin with the outermost development of his
		intensity, consider how he paints. He has a great
		power of vision; seizes the very type of a thing; presents
		that and nothing more. You remember that first
		view he gets of the Hall of Dite: <em>red</em> pinnacle, redhot
		cone of iron glowing through the dim immensity of
		gloom;&#8212;so vivid, so distinct, visible at once and forever!
		It is as an emblem of the whole genius of Dante.
		There is a brevity, an abrupt precision in him: Tacitus
		is not briefer, more condensed; and then in Dante it
		seems a natural condensation, spontaneous to the man.
		One smiting word; and then there is silence, nothing
		more said. His silence is more eloquent than words.
		It is strange with what a sharp decisive grace he
		snatches the true likeness of a matter: cuts into the
		matter as with a pen of fire. Plutus, the blustering
		giant, collapses at Virgil&#8217;s rebuke; it is &#8216;as the sails
		sink, the mast being suddenly broken.&#8217; Or that poor
		Brunetto Latini, with the <i>cotto aspetto</i>, &#8216;face <em>baked</em>,&#8217;
		parched brown and lean; and the &#8216;fiery snow,&#8217; that
		falls on them there, a &#8216;fiery snow without wind,&#8217; slow,
		deliberate, never-ending! Or the lids of those Tombs;
		square sarcophaguses, in that silent dim-burning Hall,
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page326" name="page326"></a>326</span>each with its Soul in torment; the lids laid open there;
		they are to be shut at the Day of Judgment, through
		Eternity. And how Farinata rises; and how Cavalcante
		falls&#8212;at hearing of his Son, and the past tense
		&#8216;<i>fue</i>&#8217;! The very movements in Dante have something
		brief; swift, decisive, almost military. It is of the
		inmost essence of his genius this sort of painting. The
		fiery, swift Italian nature of the man, so silent, passionate,
		with its quick abrupt movements, its silent &#8216;pale
		rages,&#8217; speaks itself in these things.</p>

		<p>For though this of painting is one of the outermost
		developments of a man, it comes like all else from the
		essential faculty of him; it is physiognomical of the
		whole man. Find a man whose words paint you a likeness,
		you have found a man worth something; mark
		his manner of doing it, as very characteristic of him.
		In the first place, he could not have discerned the object
		at all, or seen the vital type of it, unless he had, what
		we may call, <em>sympathised</em> with it,&#8212;had sympathy in him
		to bestow on objects. He must have been <em>sincere</em> about
		it too; sincere and sympathetic: a man without worth
		cannot give you the likeness of any object; he dwells
		in vague outwardness, fallacy and trivial hearsay, about
		all objects. And indeed may we not say that intellect
		altogether expresses itself in this power of discerning
		what an object is? Whatsoever of faculty a man&#8217;s mind
		may have will come out here. Is it even of business, a
		matter to be done? The gifted man is he who <em>sees</em> the
		essential point, and leaves all the rest aside as surplusage:
		it is his faculty too, the man of business&#8217;s
		faculty, that he discern the true <em>likeness</em>, not the false
		superficial one, of the thing he has got to work in. And
		how much of <em>morality</em> is in the kind of insight we get
		of anything; &#8216;the eye seeing in all things what it brought
		with it the faculty of seeing&#8217;! To the mean eye all
		things are trivial, as certainly as to the jaundiced they
		are yellow. Raphael, the Painters tell us, is the best
		of all Portrait-painters withal. No most gifted eye can
		exhaust the significance of any object. In the commonest
		human face there lies more than Raphael will
		take-away with him.</p>

		<p>Dante&#8217;s painting is not graphic only, brief, true, and
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page327" name="page327"></a>327</span>of a vividness as of fire in dark night; taken on the
		wider scale, it is everyway noble, and the outcome of a
		great soul. Francesca and her Lover, what qualities in
		that! A thing woven as out of rainbows, on a ground
		of eternal black. A small flute-voice of infinite wail
		speaks there, into our very heart of hearts. A touch
		of womanhood in it too; <i>della bella persona, che mi fu
		tolta</i>; and how, even in the Pit of woe, it is a solace
		that <em>he</em> will never part from her! Saddest tragedy in
		these <i>alti guai</i>. And the racking winds, in that <i>aer
		bruno</i>, whirl them away again, to wail forever!&#8212;Strange
		to think: Dante was the friend of this poor
		Francesca&#8217;s father; Francesca herself may have sat
		upon the Poet&#8217;s knee, as a bright innocent little child.
		Infinite pity, yet also infinite rigour of law: it is so
		Nature is made; it is so Dante discerned that she was
		made. What a paltry notion is that of his <i>Divine
		Comedy&#8217;s</i> being a poor splenetic impotent terrestrial
		libel; putting those into Hell whom he could not be
		avenged-upon on earth! I suppose if ever pity, tender
		as a mother&#8217;s, was in the heart of any man, it was in
		Dante&#8217;s. But a man who does not know rigour cannot
		pity either. His very pity will be cowardly, egoistic,&#8212;sentimentality,
		or little better. I know not in the world
		an affection equal to that of Dante. It is a tenderness,
		a trembling, longing, pitying love: like the wail of
		Æolean harps, soft, soft; like a child&#8217;s young heart;&#8212;and
		then that stern, sore-saddened heart! These longings
		of his towards his Beatrice; their meeting together
		in the <i>Paradiso</i>; his gazing in her pure transfigured
		eyes, her that had been purified by death so long,
		separated from him so far:&#8212;one likens it to the song
		of angels; it is among the purest utterances of affection,
		perhaps the very purest, that ever came out of a
		human soul.</p>

		<p>For the <em>intense</em> Dante is intense in all things; he has
		got into the essence of all. His intellectual insight as
		painter, on occasion too as reasoner, is but the result
		of all other sorts of intensity. Morally great, above all,
		we must call him; it is the beginning of all. His scorn,
		his grief are as transcendent as his love;&#8212;as indeed,
		what are they but the <em>inverse</em> or <em>converse</em> of his love?
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page328" name="page328"></a>328</span>&#8217;<i>A Dio spiacenti ed a&#8217; nemici sui</i>, Hateful to God and
		to the enemies of God:&#8217; lofty scorn, unappeasable silent
		reprobation and aversion; &#8216;<i>Non ragionam di lor</i>, We
		will not speak of <em>them</em>, look only and pass.&#8217; Or think
		of this; &#8216;They have not the <em>hope</em> to die, <i>Non han speranza
		di morte</i>.&#8217; One day, it had risen sternly benign
		on the scathed heart of Dante, that he, wretched, never-resting,
		worn as he was, would full surely <em>die</em>; &#8216;that
		Destiny itself could not doom him not to die.&#8217; Such
		words are in this man. For rigour, earnestness and
		depth, he is not to be paralleled in the modern world;
		to seek his parallel we must go into the Hebrew Bible,
		and live with the antique Prophets there.</p>

		<p>I do not agree with much modern criticism, in greatly
		preferring the <i>Inferno</i> to the two other parts of the
		Divine <i>Commedia</i>. Such preference belongs, I imagine,
		to our general Byronism of taste, and is like to be a
		transient feeling. The <i>Purgatorio</i> and <i>Paradiso</i>, especially
		the former, one would almost say, is even more
		excellent than it. It is a noble thing that <i>Purgatorio</i>,
		&#8216;Mountain of Purification&#8217;; an emblem of the noblest
		conception of that age. If Sin is so fatal, and Hell is
		and must be so rigorous, awful, yet in Repentance too
		is man purified; Repentance is the grand Christian act.
		It is beautiful how Dante works it out. The <i>tremolar
		dell&#8217; onde</i> that &#8216;trembling&#8217; of the ocean-waves, under
		the first pure gleam of morning, dawning afar on the
		wandering Two, is as the type of an altered mood.
		Hope has now dawned; never-dying Hope, if in company
		still with heavy sorrow. The obscure sojourn of
		dæmons and reprobate is underfoot; a soft breathing
		of penitence mounts higher and higher, to the Throne
		of Mercy itself. &#8220;Pray for me,&#8221; the denizens of that
		Mount of Pain all say to him. &#8220;Tell my Giovanna to pray
		for me,&#8221; my daughter Giovanna; &#8220;I think her mother
		loves me no more!&#8221; They toil painfully up by that
		winding steep, &#8216;bent-down like corbels of a building,&#8217;
		some of them,&#8212;crushed-together so &#8216;for the sin of
		pride&#8217;; yet nevertheless in years, in ages and æons,
		they shall have reached the top, which is Heaven&#8217;s gate,
		and by Mercy shall have been admitted in. The joy
		too of all, when one has prevailed; the whole Mountain
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page329" name="page329"></a>329</span>shakes with joy, and a psalm of praise rises, when one
		soul has perfected repentance and got its sin and misery
		left behind! I call all this a noble embodiment of a
		true noble thought.</p>

		<p>But indeed the Three compartments mutually support
		one another, are indispensable to one another.
		The <i>Paradiso</i>, a kind of inarticulate music to me, is
		the redeeming side of the <i>Inferno</i>; the <i>Inferno</i> without
		it were untrue. All three make-up the true Unseen
		World, as figured in the Christianity of the Middle
		Ages; a thing forever memorable, forever true in the
		essence of it, to all men. It was perhaps delineated
		in no human soul with such depth of veracity as in this
		of Dante&#8217;s; a man <em>sent</em> to sing it, to keep it long
		memorable. Very notable with what brief simplicity he
		passes out of the every-day reality, into the Invisible
		one; and in the second or third stanza, we find ourselves
		in the World of Spirits; and dwell there, as
		among things palpable, indubitable! To Dante they
		<em>were</em> so; the real world, as it is called, and its facts,
		was but the threshold to an infinitely higher Fact of
		a World. At bottom, the one was as <em>preter</em>-natural as
		the other. Has not each man a soul? He will not only
		be a spirit, but is one. To the earnest Dante it is all
		one visible Fact; he believes it, sees it; is the Poet
		of it in virtue of that. Sincerity, I say again, is the
		saving merit, now as always.</p>

		<p>Dante&#8217;s Hell, Purgatory, Paradise, are a symbol
		withal, an emblematic representation of his Belief about
		this Universe:&#8212;some Critic in a future age, like those
		Scandinavian ones the other day, who has ceased altogether
		to think as Dante did, may find this too all an
		&#8216;Allegory,&#8217; perhaps an idle Allegory! It is a sublime
		embodiment, or sublimest, of the soul of Christianity.
		It expresses, as in huge worldwide architectural emblems,
		how the Christian Dante felt Good and Evil to
		be the two polar elements of this Creation, on which it
		all turns; that these two differ not by <em>preferability</em> of
		one to the other, but by incompatibility absolute and
		infinite; that the one is excellent and high as light and
		Heaven, the other hideous, black as Gehenna and the
		Pit of Hell! Everlasting Justice, yet with Penitence,
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page330" name="page330"></a>330</span>with everlasting Pity,&#8212;all Christianism, as Dante and
		the Middle Ages had it, is emblemed here. Emblemed:
		and yet, as I urged the other day, with what entire
		truth of purpose; how unconscious of any embleming!
		Hell, Purgatory, Paradise: these things were not
		fashioned as emblems; was there, in our Modern
		European Mind, any thought at all of their being
		emblems? Were they not indubitable awful facts; the
		whole heart of man taking them for practically true,
		all Nature everywhere confirming them? So is it
		always in these things. Men do not believe an Allegory.
		The future Critic, whatever his new thought may be,
		who considers this of Dante to have been all got-up as
		an Allegory, will commit one sore mistake!&#8212;Paganism
		we recognised as a veracious expression of the earnest
		awe-struck feeling of man towards the Universe; veracious,
		true once, and still not without worth for us. But
		mark here the difference of Paganism and Christianism;
		one great difference. Paganism emblemed chiefly the
		Operations of Nature; the destinies, efforts, combinations,
		vicissitudes of things and men in this world;
		Christianism emblemed the Law of Human Duty, the
		Moral Law of Man. One was for the sensuous nature:
		a rude helpless utterance of the <em>first</em> Thought of men,&#8212;the
		chief recognised virtue, Courage, Superiority to
		Fear. The other was not for the sensuous nature, but
		for the moral. What a progress is here, if in that
		one respect only!&#8212;</p>

		<p class="post_thoughtbreak">And so in this Dante, as we said, had ten silent
		centuries, in a very strange way, found a voice. The
		<i>Divina Commedia</i> is of Dante&#8217;s writing; yet in truth
		<em>it</em> belongs to ten Christian centuries, only the finishing
		of it is Dante&#8217;s. So always. The craftsman there, the
		smith with that metal of his, with these tools, with
		these cunning methods,&#8212;how little of all he does is
		properly <em>his</em> work! All past inventive men work there
		with him;&#8212;as indeed with all of us, in all things.
		Dante is the spokesman of the Middle Ages; the
		Thought they lived by stands here in everlasting music.
		These sublime ideas of his, terrible and beautiful, are
		the fruit of the Christian Meditation of all the good men
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page331" name="page331"></a>331</span>who had gone before him. Precious they; but also
		is not he precious? Much, had not he spoken, would
		have been dumb; not dead, yet living voiceless.</p>

		<p>On the whole, is it not an utterance, this Mystic Song,
		at once of one of the greatest human souls, and of the
		highest thing that Europe had hitherto realised for itself?
		Christianism, as Dante sings it, is another than
		Paganism in the rude Norse mind; another than
		&#8216;Bastard Christianism&#8217; half-articulately spoken in the
		Arab Desert seven-hundred years before!&#8212;The noblest
		<em>idea</em> made <em>real</em> hitherto among men, is sung, and emblemed-forth
		abidingly, by one of the noblest men. In
		the one sense and in the other, are we not right glad
		to possess it? As I calculate, it may last yet for long
		thousands of years. For the thing that is uttered from
		the inmost parts of a man&#8217;s soul, differs altogether
		from what is uttered by the outer part. The outer is
		of the day, under the empire of mode; the outer passes
		away, in swift endless changes; the inmost is the same
		yesterday, today and forever. True souls, in all
		generations of the world, who look on this Dante, will
		find a brotherhood in him; the deep sincerity of his
		thoughts, his woes and hopes, will speak likewise to
		their sincerity; they will feel that this Dante too was
		a brother. Napoleon in Saint-Helena is charmed with
		the genial veracity of old Homer. The oldest Hebrew
		Prophet, under a vesture the most diverse from ours,
		does yet, because he speaks from the heart of man,
		speak to all men&#8217;s hearts. It is the one sole secret
		of continuing long memorable. Dante, for depth of
		sincerity, is like an antique Prophet too; his words,
		like theirs, come from his very heart. One need not
		wonder if it were predicted that his Poem might be
		the most enduring thing our Europe has yet made;
		for nothing so endures as a truly spoken word. All
		cathedrals, pontificalities, brass and stone, and outer
		arrangement never so lasting, are brief in comparison
		to an unfathomable heart-song like this: one feels as
		if it might survive, still of importance to men, when
		these had all sunk into new irrecognisable combinations,
		and had ceased individually to be. Europe has made
		much; great cities, great empires, encyclopædias,
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page332" name="page332"></a>332</span>creeds, bodies of opinion and practice: but it has made
		little of the class of Dante&#8217;s Thought. Homer yet <em>is</em>,
		veritably present face to face with every open soul of
		us; and Greece, where is <em>it</em>? Desolate for thousands
		of years; away, vanished; a bewildered heap of stones
		and rubbish, the life and existence of it all gone.
		Like a dream; like the dust of King Agamemnon!
		Greece was; Greece, except in the <em>words</em> it spoke,
		is not.</p>

		<p>The uses of this Dante? We will not say much
		about his &#8216;uses.&#8217; A human soul who has once got
		into that primal element of <i>Song</i>, and sung-forth fitly
		somewhat therefrom, has worked in the <em>depths</em> of our
		existence; feeding through long times the life-<em>roots</em> of
		all excellent human things whatsoever,&#8212;in a way that
		&#8216;utilities&#8217; will not succeed well in calculating! We
		will not estimate the Sun by the quantity of gas-light
		it saves us; Dante shall be invaluable, or of no value.
		One remark I may make: the contrast in this respect
		between the Hero-Poet and the Hero-Prophet. In a
		hundred years, Mahomet, as we saw, had his Arabians
		at Grenada and at Delhi; Dante&#8217;s Italians seem to be
		yet very much where they were. Shall we say, then,
		Dante&#8217;s effect on the world was small in comparison?
		Not so: his arena is far more restricted: but also it
		is far nobler, clearer;&#8212;perhaps not less but more important.
		Mahomet speaks to great masses of men, in
		the coarse dialect adapted to such; a dialect filled with
		inconsistencies, crudities, follies: on the great masses
		alone can he act, and there with good and with evil
		strangely blended. Dante speaks to the noble, the
		pure and great, in all times and places. Neither does
		he grow obsolete, as the other does. Dante burns as
		a pure star, fixed there in the firmament, at which the
		great and the high of all ages kindle themselves: he
		is the possession of all the chosen of the world for uncounted
		time. Dante, one calculates, may long survive
		Mahomet. In this way the balance may be made
		straight again.</p>

		<p>But, at any rate, it is not by what is called their
		effect on the world by what <em>we</em> can judge of their effect
		there, that a man and his work are measured. Effect?
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page333" name="page333"></a>333</span>Influence? Utility? Let a man <em>do</em> his work; the fruit
		of it is the care of Another than he. It will grow its
		own fruit; and whether embodied in Caliph Thrones and
		Arabian Conquests, so that it &#8216;fills all Morning and
		Evening Newspapers,&#8217; and all Histories, which are a
		kind of distilled Newspapers; or not embodied so at
		all;&#8212;what matters that? That is not the real fruit of
		it! The Arabian Caliph, in so far only as he did
		something, was something. If the great Cause of Man,
		and Man&#8217;s work in God&#8217;s Earth, got no furtherance
		from the Arabian Caliph, then no matter how many
		scimetars he drew, how many gold piasters pocketed,
		and what uproar and blaring he made in this world&#8212;he
		was but a loud-sounding inanity and futility; at
		bottom, he <em>was</em> not at all. Let us honour the great
		empire of <i>Silence</i>, once more! The boundless treasury
		which we do <em>not</em> jingle in our pockets, or count up and
		present before men! It is perhaps, of all things, the
		usefulest for each of us to do, in these loud times.&#8212;&#8212;</p>

		<p class="post_thoughtbreak">As Dante, the Italian man, was sent into our world
		to embody musically the Religion of the Middle Ages,
		the Religion of our Modern Europe, its Inner Life; so
		Shakspeare, we may say, embodies for us the Outer
		Life of our Europe as developed then, its chivalries,
		courtesies, humours, ambitions, what practical way of
		thinking, acting, looking at the world, men then had.
		As in Homer we may still construe Old Greece; so in
		Shakspeare and Dante, after thousands of years, what
		our modern Europe was, in Faith and in Practice, will
		still be legible. Dante has given us the Faith or soul;
		Shakspeare, in a not less noble way, has given us the
		Practice or body. This latter also we were to have:
		a man was sent for it, the man Shakspeare. Just when
		that chivalry way of life had reached its last finish, and
		was on the point of breaking down into slow or swift
		dissolution, as we now see it everywhere, this other
		sovereign Poet, with his seeing eye, with his perennial
		singing voice, was sent to take note of it, to give long-enduring
		record of it. Two fit men: Dante, deep,
		fierce as the central fire of the world; Shakspeare, wide,
		placid, far-seeing, as the Sun, the upper light of the
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page334" name="page334"></a>334</span>world. Italy produced the one world-voice; we English
		had the honour of producing the other.</p>

		<p>Curious enough how, as it were by mere accident, this
		man came to us. I think always, so great, quiet,
		complete and self-sufficing is this Shakspeare, had the
		Warwickshire Squire not prosecuted him for deer-stealing,
		we had perhaps never heard of him as a Poet!
		The woods and skies, the rustic Life of Man in Stratford
		there, had been enough for this man! But indeed that
		strange outbudding of our whole English Existence,
		which we call the Elizabethan Era, did not it too come
		as of its own accord? The &#8216;Tree Igdrasil&#8217; buds and
		withers by its own laws,&#8212;too deep for our scanning.
		Yet it does bud and wither, and every bough and leaf
		of it is there, by fixed eternal laws; not a Sir Thomas
		Lucy but comes at the hour fit for him. Curious, I
		say, and not sufficiently considered: how everything
		does coöperate with all; not a leaf rotting on the highway
		but is indissoluble portion of solar and stellar
		systems; no thought, word or act of man but has
		sprung withal out of all men, and works sooner or
		later, recognisably or irrecognisably, on all men! It is
		all a Tree: circulation of sap and influences, mutual
		communication of every minutest leaf with the lowest
		talon of a root, with every other greatest and minutest
		portion of the whole. The Tree Igdrasil, that has its
		roots down in the Kingdoms of Hela and Death, and
		whose boughs overspread the highest Heaven!&#8212;</p>

		<p>In some sense it may be said that this glorious Elizabethan
		Era with its Shakspeare, as the outcome and
		flowerage of all which had preceded it, is itself attributable
		to the Catholicism of the Middle Ages. The
		Christian Faith, which was the theme of Dante&#8217;s Song,
		had produced this Practical Life which Shakspeare was
		to sing. For Religion then, as it now and always is,
		was the soul of Practice; the primary vital fact in men&#8217;s
		life. And remark here, as rather curious, that Middle-Age
		Catholicism was abolished, so far as Acts of Parliament
		could abolish it, before Shakspeare, the noblest
		product of it, made his appearance. He did make his
		appearance nevertheless. Nature at her own time, with
		Catholicism or what else might be necessary, sent him
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page335" name="page335"></a>335</span>forth; taking small thought of Acts of Parliament.
		King-Henrys, Queen-Elizabeths go their way; and
		Nature too goes hers. Acts of Parliament, on the
		whole, are small, notwithstanding the noise they make.
		What Act of Parliament, debate at St. Stephen&#8217;s, on
		the hustings or elsewhere, was it that brought this
		Shakspeare into being? No dining at Freemasons&#8217;
		Tavern, opening subscription-lists, selling of shares, and
		infinite other jangling and true or false endeavouring!
		This Elizabethan Era, and all its nobleness and blessedness,
		came without proclamation, preparation of ours.
		Priceless Shakspeare was the free gift of Nature;
		given altogether silently;&#8212;received altogether silently,
		as if it had been a thing of little account. And yet,
		very literally, it is a priceless thing. One should look
		at that side of matters too.</p>

		<p>Of this Shakspeare of ours, perhaps the opinion one
		sometimes hears a little idolatrously expressed is, in
		fact, the right one; I think the best judgment not of
		this country only, but of Europe at large, is slowly
		pointing to the conclusion, That Shakspeare is the chief
		of all Poets hitherto; the greatest intellect who, in
		our recorded world, has left record of himself in the
		way of Literature. On the whole, I know not such a
		power of vision, such a faculty of thought, if we take
		all the characters of it, in any other man. Such a
		calmness of depth; placid joyous strength; all things
		imaged in that great soul of his so true and clear, as in
		a tranquil unfathomable sea! It has been said, that in
		the constructing of Shakspeare&#8217;s Dramas there is, apart
		from all other &#8216;faculties&#8217; as they are called, an understanding
		manifested, equal to that in Bacon&#8217;s <i>Novum
		Organum</i>. That is true; and it is not a truth that
		strikes every one. It would become more apparent if
		we tried, any of us for himself, how, out of Shakspeare&#8217;s
		dramatic materials, <em>we</em> could fashion such a
		result! The built house seems all so fit,&#8212;everyway
		as it should be, as if it came there by its own law and
		the nature of things,&#8212;we forget the rude disorderly
		quarry it was shaped from. The very perfection of the
		house, as if Nature herself had made it, hides the
		builder&#8217;s merit. Perfect, more perfect than any other
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page336" name="page336"></a>336</span>man, we may call Shakspeare in this: he discerns,
		knows as by instinct, what condition he works under,
		what his materials are, what his own force and its relation
		to them is. It is not a transitory glance of insight
		that will suffice; it is deliberate illumination of the whole
		matter; it is a calmly <em>seeing</em> eye; a great intellect, in
		short. How a man, of some wide thing that he has
		witnessed, will construct a narrative, what kind of
		picture and delineation he will give of it,&#8212;is the best
		measure you could get of what intellect is in the man.
		Which circumstance is vital and shall stand prominent;
		which unessential, fit to be suppressed; where is the
		true <em>beginning</em>, the true sequence and ending? To
		find out this, you task the whole force of insight that
		is in the man. He must <em>understand</em> the thing; according
		to the depth of his understanding, will the fitness
		of his answer be. You will try him so. Does like join
		itself to like; does the spirit of method stir in that
		confusion, so that its embroilment becomes order? Can
		the man say, <i>Fiat lux</i>, Let there be light; and out of
		chaos make a world? Precisely as there is <em>light</em> in
		himself, will he accomplish this.</p>

		<p>Or indeed we may say again, it is in what I called
		Portrait-painting, delineating of men and things, especially
		of men, that Shakspeare is great. All the greatness
		of the man comes out decisively here. It is
		unexampled, I think, that calm creative perspicacity of
		Shakspeare. The thing he looks at reveals not this or
		that face of it, but its inmost heart, and generic secret:
		it dissolves itself as in light before him, so that he
		discerns the perfect structure of it. Creative, we said:
		poetic creation, what is this too but <em>seeing</em> the thing
		sufficiently? The <em>word</em> that will describe the thing,
		follows of itself from such clear intense sight of the
		thing. And is not Shakspeare&#8217;s <em>morality</em>, his valour,
		candour, tolerance, truthfulness; his whole victorious
		strength and greatness, which can triumph over such
		obstructions, visible there too? Great as the world!
		No <em>twisted</em>, poor convex-concave mirror, reflecting all
		objects with its own convexities and concavities; a
		perfectly <em>level</em> mirror;&#8212;that is to say withal, if we will
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page337" name="page337"></a>337</span>understand it, a man justly related to all things and
		men, a good man. It is truly a lordly spectacle how
		this great soul takes-in all kinds of men and objects,
		a Falstaff, an Othello, a Juliet, a Coriolanus; sets them
		all forth to us in their round completeness; loving,
		just, the equal brother of all. <i>Novum Organum</i>, and
		all the intellect you will find in Bacon, is of a quite
		secondary order; earthly, material, poor in comparison
		with this. Among modern men, one finds, in strictness,
		almost nothing of the same rank. Goethe alone,
		since the days of Shakspeare, reminds me of it. Of
		him too you say that he <em>saw</em> the object; you may say
		what he himself says of Shakspeare: &#8216;His characters
		are like watches with dial-plates of transparent crystal;
		they show you the hour like others, and the inward
		mechanism also is all visible.&#8217;</p>

		<p>The seeing eye! It is this that discloses the inner
		harmony of things; what Nature meant, what musical
		idea Nature has wrapped-up in these often rough
		embodiments. Something she did mean. To the seeing
		eye that something were discernible. Are they base,
		miserable things? You can laugh over them, you can
		weep over them; you can in some way or other genially
		relate yourself to them;&#8212;you can, at lowest, hold your
		peace about them, turn away your own and others&#8217; face
		from them, till the hour come for practically exterminating
		and extinguishing them! At bottom, it is the
		Poet&#8217;s first gift, as it is all men&#8217;s, that he have intellect
		enough. He will be a Poet if he have: a Poet in word;
		or failing that, perhaps still better, a Poet in act.
		Whether he write at all; and if so, whether in prose or
		in verse, will depend on accidents: who knows on what
		extremely trivial accidents,&#8212;perhaps on his having had
		a singing-master, on his being taught to sing in his
		boyhood! But the faculty which enables him to discern
		the inner heart of things, and the harmony that dwells
		there (for whatsoever exists has a harmony in the heart
		of it, or it would not hold together and exist), is not
		the result of habits or accidents, but the gift of Nature
		herself; the primary outfit for a Heroic Man in what
		sort soever. To the Poet, as to every other, we say
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page338" name="page338"></a>338</span>first of all, <i>See</i>. If you cannot do that, it is of no use
		to keep stringing rhymes together, jingling sensibilities
		against each other, and <em>name</em> yourself a Poet; there is
		no hope for you. If you can, there is, in prose or
		verse, in action or speculation, all manner of hope.
		The crabbed old Schoolmaster used to ask, when they
		brought him a new pupil, &#8220;But are ye sure he&#8217;s <i>not a
		dunce</i>?&#8221; Why, really one might ask the same thing
		in regard to every man proposed for whatsoever function;
		and consider it as the one inquiry needful: Are
		ye sure he&#8217;s not a dunce? There is, in this world, no
		other entirely fatal person.</p>

		<p>For, in fact, I say the degree of vision that dwells
		in a man is a correct measure of the man. If called
		to define Shakspeare&#8217;s faculty, I should say superiority
		of Intellect, and think I had included all under that.
		What indeed are faculties? We talk of faculties as if
		they were distinct, things separable; as if a man had
		intellect, imagination, fancy, &amp;c, as he has hands, feet
		and arms. That is a capital error. Then again, we
		hear of a man&#8217;s &#8216;intellectual nature,&#8217; and of his &#8216;moral
		nature,&#8217; as if these again were divisible, and existed
		apart. Necessities of language do perhaps prescribe
		such forms of utterance; we must speak, I am aware,
		in that way, if we are to speak at all. But words ought
		not to harden into things for us. It seems to me, our
		apprehension of this matter is, for the most part,
		radically falsified thereby. We ought to know withal,
		and to keep for ever in mind, that these divisions are
		at bottom but <em>names</em>; that man&#8217;s spiritual nature, the
		vital Force which dwells in him, is essentially one and
		indivisible; that what we call imagination, fancy, understanding,
		and so forth, are but different figures of the
		same Power of Insight, all indissolubly connected with
		each other, physiognomically related; that if we knew
		one of them, we might know all of them. Morality
		itself, what we call the moral quality of a man, what is
		this but another <em>side</em> of the one vital Force whereby
		he is and works? All that a man does is physiognomical
		of him. You may see how a man would fight,
		by the way in which he sings; his courage, or want of
		courage, is visible in the word he utters, in the opinion
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page339" name="page339"></a>339</span>he has formed, no less than in the stroke he strikes.
		He is <em>one</em>; and preaches the same Self abroad in all
		these ways.</p>

		<p>Without hands a man might have feet, and could
		still walk: but, consider it,&#8212;without morality, intellect
		were impossible for him; a thoroughly immoral <em>man</em>
		could not know anything at all! To know a thing,
		what we can call knowing, a man must first <em>love</em> the
		thing, sympathise with it: that is, be <em>virtuously</em> related
		to it. If he have not the justice to put down his own
		selfishness at every turn, the courage to stand by the
		dangerous-true at every turn, how shall he know? His
		virtues, all of them, will lie recorded in his knowledge.
		Nature, with her truth, remains to the bad, to the selfish
		and the pusillanimous forever a sealed book: what such
		can know of Nature is mean, superficial, small; for the
		uses of the day merely.&#8212;But does not the very Fox
		know something of Nature? Exactly so: it knows
		where the geese lodge! The human Reynard, very
		frequent everywhere in the world, what more does he
		know but this and the like of this? Nay, it should be
		considered, too, that if the Fox had not a certain vulpine
		<em>morality</em>, he could not even know where the geese were,
		or get at the geese! If he spent his time in splenetic
		atrabiliar reflections on his own misery, his ill usage by
		Nature, Fortune and other Foxes, and so forth; and
		had not courage, promptitude, practicality, and other
		suitable vulpine gifts and graces, he would catch no
		geese. We may say of the Fox too, that his morality
		and insight are of the same dimensions; different faces
		of the same internal unity of vulpine life!&#8212;These things
		are worth stating; for the contrary of them acts with
		manifold very baleful perversion, in this time: what
		limitations, modifications they require, your own
		candour will supply.</p>

		<p>If I say, therefore, that Shakspeare is the greatest of
		Intellects, I have said all concerning him. But there is
		more in Shakspeare&#8217;s intellect than we have yet seen.
		It is what I call an unconscious intellect; there is more
		virtue in it than he himself is aware of. Novalis beautifully
		remarks of him, that those Dramas of his are
		Products of Nature too, deep as Nature herself. I find
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page340" name="page340"></a>340</span>a great truth in this saying. Shakspeare&#8217;s Art is not
		Artifice; the noblest worth of it is not there by plan or
		precontrivance. It grows-up from the deeps of Nature,
		through this noble sincere soul, who is a voice of
		Nature. The latest generations of men will find new
		meanings in Shakspeare, new elucidations of their own
		human being; &#8216;new harmonies with the infinite structure
		of the Universe; concurrences with later ideas,
		affinities with the higher powers and senses of man.&#8217;
		This well deserves meditating. It is Nature&#8217;s highest
		reward to a true simple great soul, that he get thus
		to be a <em>part of herself</em>. Such a man&#8217;s works, whatsoever
		he with utmost conscious exertion and forethought
		shall accomplish, grow up withal unconsciously, from
		the unknown deeps in him;&#8212;as the oak-tree grows from
		the Earth&#8217;s bosom, as the mountains and waters shape
		themselves; with a symmetry grounded on Nature&#8217;s
		own laws, conformable to all Truth whatsoever. How
		much in Shakspeare lies hid; his sorrows, his silent
		struggles known to himself; much that was not known
		at all, not speakable at all; like <em>roots</em>, like sap and
		forces working underground! Speech is great; but
		Silence is greater.</p>

		<p>Withal the joyful tranquillity of this man is notable.
		I will not blame Dante for his misery: it is as battle
		without victory; but true battle,&#8212;the first, indispensable
		thing. Yet I call Shakspeare greater than Dante,
		in that he fought truly, and did conquer. Doubt it not,
		he had his own sorrows: those <i>Sonnets</i> of his will even
		testify expressly in what deep waters he had waded, and
		swum struggling for his life;&#8212;as what man like him
		ever failed to have to do? It seems to me a heedless
		notion, our common one, that he sat like a bird on the
		bough; and sang forth, free and offhand, never knowing
		the troubles of other men. Not so; with no man
		is it so. How could a man travel forward from rustic
		deer-poaching to such tragedy-writing, and not fall-in
		with sorrows by the way? Or, still better, how could
		a man delineate a Hamlet, a Coriolanus, a Macbeth, so
		many suffering heroic hearts, if his own heroic heart had
		never suffered?&#8212;And now, in contrast with all this,
		observe his mirthfulness, his genuine overflowing love
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page341" name="page341"></a>341</span>of laughter! You would say, in no point does he
		<em>exaggerate</em> but only in laughter. Fiery objurgations,
		words that pierce and burn, are to be found in Shakspeare;
		yet he is always in measure here; never what
		Johnson would remark as a specially &#8216;good hater.&#8217;
		But his laughter seems to pour from him in floods; he
		heaps all manner of ridiculous nicknames on the butt
		he is bantering, tumbles and tosses him in all sorts of
		horse-play; you would say, with his whole heart laughs.
		And then, if not always the finest, it is always a genial
		laughter. Not at mere weakness, at misery or poverty;
		never. No man who <em>can</em> laugh, what we call laughing,
		will laugh at these things. It is some poor character
		only <em>desiring</em> to laugh, and have the credit of wit, that
		does so. Laughter means sympathy; good laughter is
		not &#8216;the crackling of thorns under the pot.&#8217; Even at
		stupidity and pretension this Shakspeare does not laugh
		otherwise than genially. Dogberry and Verges tickle
		our very hearts; and we dismiss them covered with explosions
		of laughter: but we like the poor fellows only
		the better for our laughing; and hope they will get on
		well there, and continue Presidents of the City-watch.
		Such laughter, like sunshine on the deep sea, is very
		beautiful to me.</p>

		<p class="post_thoughtbreak">We have no room to speak of Shakspeare&#8217;s individual
		works; though perhaps there is much still waiting to
		be said on that head. Had we, for instance, all his
		plays reviewed as <i>Hamlet</i>, in <i>Wilhelm Meister</i>, is! A
		thing which might, one day, be done. August Wilhelm
		Schlegel has a remark on his Historical Plays, <i>Henry
		Fifth</i> and the others, which is worth remembering. He
		calls them a kind of National Epic. Marlborough, you
		recollect, said, he knew no English History but what
		he had learned from Shakspeare. There are really, if
		we look to it, few as memorable Histories. The great
		salient points are admirably seized; all rounds itself off,
		into a kind of rhythmic coherence; it is, as Schlegel says,
		<em>epic</em>;&#8212;as indeed all delineation by a great thinker will
		be. There are right beautiful things in those Pieces,
		which indeed together form one beautiful thing. That
		battle of Agincourt strikes me as one of the most perfect
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page342" name="page342"></a>342</span>things, in its sort, we anywhere have of Shakspeare&#8217;s.
		The description of the two hosts: the worn-out,
		jaded English; the dread hour, big with destiny,
		when the battle shall begin; and then that deathless
		valour: &#8220;Ye good yeomen, whose limbs were made in
		England!&#8221; There is a noble Patriotism in it,&#8212;far
		other than the &#8216;indifference&#8217; you sometimes hear ascribed
		to Shakspeare. A true English heart breathes,
		calm and strong, through the whole business; not
		boisterous, protrusive; all the better for that. There
		is a sound in it like the ring of steel. This man too had
		a right stroke in him, had it come to that!</p>

		<p>But I will say, of Shakspeare&#8217;s works generally, that
		we have no full impress of him there; even as full as
		we have of many men. His works are so many windows,
		through which we see a glimpse of the world that was
		in him. All his works seem, comparatively speaking,
		cursory, imperfect, written under cramping circumstances;
		giving only here and there a note of the full
		utterance of the man. Passages there are that come
		upon you like splendour out of Heaven; bursts of
		radiance, illuminating the very heart of the thing: you
		say, &#8220;That is <em>true</em>, spoken once and forever; wheresoever
		and whensoever there is an open human soul,
		that will be recognised as true!&#8221; Such bursts, however,
		make us feel that the surrounding matter is not
		radiant; that it is, in part, temporary, conventional.
		Alas, Shakspeare had to write for the Globe Play-house:
		his great soul had to crush itself, as it could, into that
		and no other mould. It was with him, then, as it is
		with us all. No man works save under conditions. The
		sculptor cannot set his own free Thought before us; but
		his Thought as he could translate it into the stone that
		was given, with the tools that were given. <i>Disjecta
		membra</i> are all that we find of any Poet, or of any man.</p>

		<p class="post_thoughtbreak">Whoever looks intelligently at this Shakspeare may
		recognise that he too was a <i>Prophet</i>, in his way; of an
		insight analogous to the Prophetic, though he took it
		up in another strain. Nature seemed to this man also
		divine; unspeakable, deep as Tophet, high as Heaven:
		&#8216;We are such stuff as Dreams are made of!&#8217; That
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page343" name="page343"></a>343</span>scroll in Westminster Abbey, which few read with
		understanding, is of the depth of any seer. But the
		man sang; did not preach, except musically. We
		called Dante the melodious Priest of Middle-Age
		Catholicism. May we not call Shakspeare the still more
		melodious Priest of a <em>true</em> Catholicism, the &#8216;Universal
		Church&#8217; of the Future and of all times? No narrow superstition,
		harsh asceticism, intolerance, fanatical fierceness
		or perversion: a Revelation, so far as it goes,
		that such a thousandfold hidden beauty and divineness
		dwells in all Nature; which let all men worship as they
		can! We may say without offence, that there rises a
		kind of universal Psalm out of this Shakspeare too; not
		unfit to make itself heard among the still more sacred
		Psalms. Not in disharmony with these, if we understood
		them, but in harmony!&#8212;I cannot call this Shakspeare
		a &#8216;Sceptic,&#8217; as some do; his indifference to the
		creeds and theological quarrels of his time misleading
		them. No: neither unpatriotic, though he says little
		about his Patriotism; nor sceptic, though he says little
		about his Faith. Such &#8216;indifference&#8217; was the fruit of
		his greatness withal: his whole heart was in his own
		grand sphere of worship (we may call it such): these
		other controversies, vitally important to other men, were
		not vital to him.</p>

		<p>But call it worship, call it what you will, is it not a
		right glorious thing, and set of things, this that Shakspeare
		has brought us? For myself, I feel that there
		is actually a kind of sacredness in the fact of such a man
		being sent into this Earth. Is he not an eye to us all;
		a blessed heaven-sent Bringer of Light?&#8212;And, at
		bottom, was it not perhaps far better that this Shakspeare,
		everyway an unconscious man, was <em>conscious</em>
		of no Heavenly message? He did not feel, like Mahomet,
		because he saw into those internal Splendours,
		that he specially was the &#8216;Prophet of God:&#8217; and was he
		not greater than Mahomet in that? Greater; and also,
		if we compute strictly, as we did in Dante&#8217;s case, more
		successful. It was intrinsically an error that notion of
		Mahomet&#8217;s, of his supreme Prophethood: and has come
		down to us inextricably involved in error to this day;
		dragging along with it such a coil of fables, impurities,
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page344" name="page344"></a>344</span>intolerances, as makes it a questionable step for me here
		and now to say, as I have done, that Mahomet was a
		true Speaker at all, and not rather an ambitious
		charlatan, perversity and simulacrum; no Speaker, but
		a Babbler! Even in Arabia, as I compute, Mahomet
		will have exhausted himself and become obsolete, while
		this Shakspeare, this Dante may still be young;&#8212;while
		this Shakspeare may still pretend to be a Priest of Mankind,
		of Arabia as of other places, for unlimited periods
		to come!</p>

		<p>Compared with any speaker or singer one knows, even
		with Æschylus or Homer, why should he not, for
		veracity and universality, last like them? He is <em>sincere</em>
		as they; reaches deep down like them, to the universal
		and perennial. But as for Mahomet, I think it had
		been better for him <em>not</em> to be so conscious! Alas, poor
		Mahomet; all that he was <em>conscious</em> of was a mere
		error; a futility and triviality,&#8212;as indeed such ever is.
		The truly great in him too was the unconscious: that he
		was a wild Arab lion of the desert, and did speak-out
		with that great thunder-voice of his, not by words which
		he <em>thought</em> to be great, but by actions, by feelings, by
		a history which <em>were</em> great! His Koran has become a
		stupid piece of prolix absurdity; we do not believe, like
		him, that God wrote that! The Great Man here too, as
		always, is a Force of Nature: whatsoever is truly great
		in him springs-up from the inarticulate deeps.</p>

		<p class="post_thoughtbreak">Well: this is our poor Warwickshire Peasant, who
		rose to be Manager of a Playhouse, so that he could
		live without begging; whom the Earl of Southampton
		cast some kind glances on; whom Sir Thomas Lucy,
		many thanks to him, was for sending to the Treadmill!
		We did not account him a god, like Odin, while he
		dwelt with us;&#8212;on which point there were much to be
		said. But I will say rather, or repeat: In spite of the
		sad state Hero-worship now lies in, consider what this
		Shakspeare has actually become among us. Which
		Englishman we ever made, in this land of ours, which
		million of Englishmen, would we not give-up rather than
		the Stratford Peasant? There is no regiment of highest
		Dignitaries that we would sell him for. He is the grandest
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page345" name="page345"></a>345</span>thing we have yet done. For our honour among
		foreign nations, as an ornament to our English Household,
		what item is there that we would not surrender
		rather than him? Consider now, if they asked us, Will
		you give-up your Indian Empire or your Shakspeare,
		you English; never have had any Indian Empire, or
		never have had any Shakspeare? Really it were a grave
		question. Official persons would answer doubtless in
		official language; but we, for our part too, should not
		we be forced to answer: Indian Empire, or no Indian
		Empire; we cannot do without Shakspeare! Indian
		Empire will go, at any rate, some day; but this Shakspeare
		does not go, he lasts forever with us; we cannot
		give-up our Shakspeare!</p>

		<p>Nay, apart from spiritualities; and considering him
		merely as a real, marketable, tangibly-useful possession.
		England, before long, this Island of ours, will hold but
		a small fraction of the English: in America, in New
		Holland, east and west to the very Antipodes, there will
		be a Saxondom covering great spaces of the Globe.
		And now, what is it that can keep all these together into
		virtually one Nation, so that they do not fall-out and
		fight, but live at peace, in brotherlike intercourse, helping
		one another? This is justly regarded as the greatest
		practical problem, the thing all manner of sovereignties
		and governments are here to accomplish: what is it
		that will accomplish this? Acts of Parliament, administrative
		prime-ministers cannot. America is parted from
		us, so far as Parliament could part it. Call it not
		fantastic, for there is much reality in it: Here, I say,
		is an English King, whom no time or chance, Parliament
		or combination of Parliaments, can dethrone!
		This King Shakspeare, does not he shine, in crowned
		sovereignty, over us all, as the noblest, gentlest, yet
		strongest of rallying-signs; indestructible; really more
		valuable in that point of view than any other means or
		appliance whatsoever? We can fancy him as radiant
		aloft over all the Nations of Englishmen, a thousand
		years hence. From Paramatta, from New York, wheresoever,
		under what sort of Parish-Constable soever,
		English men and women are, they will say to one
		another: &#8220;Yes, this Shakspeare is ours; we produced
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page346" name="page346"></a>346</span>him, we speak and think by him; we are of one blood
		and kind with him.&#8221; The most common-sense politician
		too, if he pleases, may think of that.</p>

		<p>Yes, truly, it is a great thing for a Nation that it get
		an articulate voice; that it produce a man who will
		speak-forth melodiously what the heart of it means!
		Italy, for example, poor Italy lies dismembered,
		scattered asunder, not appearing in any protocol or
		treaty as a unity at all; yet the noble Italy is actually
		<em>one</em>: Italy produced its Dante; Italy can speak! The
		Czar of all the Russias, he is strong, with so many
		bayonets, Cossacks and cannons; and does a great feat
		in keeping such a tract of Earth politically together;
		but he cannot yet speak. Something great in him, but
		it is a dumb greatness. He has had no voice of genius,
		to be heard of all men and times. He must learn to
		speak. He is a great dumb monster hitherto. His
		cannons and Cossacks will all have rusted into nonentity,
		while that Dante&#8217;s voice is still audible. The Nation
		that has a Dante is bound together as no dumb Russia
		can be.&#8212;We must here end what we had to say of the
		<i>Hero-Poet</i>.</p>

	</div>
	<div id="lectureiv" class="lecture">
		<p class="lecture_head">LECTURE IV</p>

		<h3 class="lecture_title">THE HERO AS PRIEST. LUTHER; REFORMATION: KNOX; PURITANISM.</h3>

		<p class="lecture_date">[Friday, 15th May 1840]</p>

		<p><span class="first_word">Our</span> present discourse is to be of the Great Man as
		Priest. We have repeatedly endeavoured to explain
		that all sorts of Heroes are intrinsically of the same
		material; that given a great soul, open to the Divine
		Significance of Life, then there is given a man fit to
		speak of this, to sing of this, to fight and work for
		this, in a great, victorious, enduring manner; there
		is given a Hero,&#8212;the outward shape of whom will
		depend on the time and the environment he finds himself
		in. The priest too, as I understand it, is a kind of
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page347" name="page347"></a>347</span>Prophet; in him too there is required to be a light of
		inspiration, as we must name it. He presides over the
		worship of the people; is the Uniter of them with the
		Unseen Holy. He is the spiritual Captain of the people;
		as the Prophet is their spiritual King with many captains:
		he guides them heavenward, by wise guidance
		through this Earth and its work. The ideal of him is,
		that he too be what we can call a voice from the unseen
		Heaven; interpreting, even as the Prophet did, and in
		a more familiar manner unfolding the same to men.
		The unseen Heaven,&#8212;the &#8216;open secret of the Universe,&#8217;&#8212;which
		so few have an eye for! He is the Prophet
		shorn of his more awful splendour; burning with mild
		equable radiance, as the enlightener of daily life. This,
		I say, is the ideal of a Priest. So in old times; so in
		these, and in all times. One knows very well that, in
		reducing ideals to practice, great latitude of tolerance is
		needful; very great. But a Priest who is not this at
		all, who does not any longer aim or try to be this, is
		a character&#8212;of whom we had rather not speak in this
		place.</p>

		<p>Luther and Knox were by express vocation Priests,
		and did faithfully perform that function in its common
		sense. Yet it will suit us better here to consider them
		chiefly in their historical character, rather as Reformers
		than Priests. There have been other Priests perhaps
		equally notable, in calmer times, for doing faithfully the
		office of a Leader of Worship; bringing down, by faithful
		heroism in that kind, a light from Heaven into the
		daily life of their people; leading them forward, as
		under God&#8217;s guidance, in the way wherein they were to
		go. But when this same <em>way</em> was a rough one, of
		battle, confusion and danger, the spiritual Captain, who
		led through that, becomes, especially to us who live
		under the fruit of his leading, more notable than any
		other. He is the warfaring and battling Priest; who
		led his people, not to quiet faithful labour as in smooth
		times, but to faithful valorous conflict, in times all
		violent, dismembered: a more perilous service, and a
		more memorable one, be it higher or not. These two
		men we will account our best Priests, inasmuch as they
		were our best Reformers. Nay I may ask, Is not every
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page348" name="page348"></a>348</span>true Reformer, by the nature of him, a <i>Priest</i> first of all?
		He appeals to Heaven&#8217;s invisible justice against Earth&#8217;s
		visible force; knows that it, the invisible, is strong and
		alone strong. He is a believer in the divine truth of
		things; a <em>seer</em>, seeing through the shows of things; a
		worshipper, in one way or the other, of the divine truth
		of things; a Priest, that is. If he be not first a Priest,
		he will never be good for much as a Reformer.</p>

		<p>Thus, then, as we have seen Great Men, in various
		situations, building up Religions, heroic Forms of
		human Existence in this world, Theories of Life worthy
		to be sung by a Dante, Practices of Life by a Shakspeare,&#8212;we
		are now to see the reverse process; which
		also is necessary, which also may be carried on in the
		Heroic manner. Curious how this should be necessary;
		yet necessary it is. The mild shining of the Poet&#8217;s light
		has to give place to the fierce lightning of the Reformer:
		unfortunately the Reformer too is a personage that cannot
		fail in History! The Poet indeed, with his mildness,
		what is he but the product and ultimate adjustment
		of Reform, or Prophecy with its fierceness? No wild
		Saint Dominics and Thebaïd Eremites, there had been
		no melodious Dante; rough Practical Endeavour, Scandinavian
		and other, from Odin to Walter Raleigh, from
		Ulfila to Cranmer, enabled Shakspeare to speak. Nay
		the finished Poet, I remark sometimes, is a symptom
		that his epoch itself has reached perfection and is
		finished; that before long there will be a new epoch,
		new Reformers needed.</p>

		<p>Doubtless it were finer, could we go along always in
		the way of <em>music</em>; be tamed and taught by our Poets,
		as the rude creatures were by their Orpheus of old. Or
		failing this rhythmic <em>musical</em> way, how good were it
		could we get so much as into the <em>equable</em> way; I mean,
		if <em>peaceable</em> Priests, reforming from day to day, would
		always suffice us! But it is not so; even this latter
		has not yet been realised. Alas, the battling Reformer
		too is, from time to time, a needful and inevitable phenomenon.
		Obstructions are never wanting: the very
		things that were once indispensable furtherances become
		obstructions; and need to be shaken off, and left behind
		us,&#8212;a business often of enormous difficulty. It is
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page349" name="page349"></a>349</span>notable enough, surely, how a Theorem or spiritual
		Representation, so we may call it, which once took in
		the whole Universe, and was completely satisfactory in
		all parts of it to the highly-discursive acute intellect of
		Dante, one of the greatest in the world,&#8212;had in the
		course of another century become dubitable to common
		intellects; become deniable; and is now, to every one
		of us, flatly incredible, obsolete as Odin&#8217;s Theorem! To
		Dante, human Existence, and God&#8217;s ways with men,
		were all well represented by those <i>Malebolges</i>, <i>Purgatorios</i>;
		to Luther not well. How was this? Why
		could not Dante&#8217;s Catholicism continue; but Luther&#8217;s
		Protestantism must needs follow? Alas, nothing will
		<em>continue</em>.</p>

		<p>I do not make much of &#8216;Progress of the Species,&#8217; as
		handled in these times of ours; nor do I think you would
		care to hear much about it. The talk on that subject is
		too often of the most extravagant, confused sort. Yet
		I may say, the fact itself seems certain enough; nay we
		can trace out the inevitable necessity of it in the nature
		of things. Every man, as I have stated somewhere, is
		not only a learner but a doer: he learns with the mind
		given him what has been; but with the same mind he
		discovers farther, he invents and devises somewhat of
		his own. Absolutely without originality there is no
		man. No man whatever believes, or can believe, exactly
		what his grandfather believed: he enlarges somewhat,
		by fresh discovery, his view of the Universe, and consequently
		his Theorem of the Universe,&#8212;which is an
		<em>infinite</em> Universe, and can never be embraced wholly or
		finally by any view or Theorem, in any conceivable enlargement:
		he enlarges somewhat, I say; finds somewhat
		that was credible to his grandfather incredible to
		him, false to him, inconsistent with some new thing he
		has discovered or observed. It is the history of every
		man; and in the history of Mankind we see it summed-up
		into great historical amounts,&#8212;revolutions, new
		epochs. Dante&#8217;s Mountain of Purgatory does <em>not</em> stand
		&#8216;in the ocean of the other Hemisphere,&#8217; when Columbus
		has once sailed thither! Men find no such thing extant
		in the other Hemisphere. It is not there. It must cease
		to be believed to be there. So with all beliefs whatsoever
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page350" name="page350"></a>350</span>in this world,&#8212;all Systems of Belief, and Systems
		of Practice that spring from these.</p>

		<p>If we add now the melancholy fact, that when Belief
		waxes uncertain, Practice too becomes unsound, and
		errors, injustices and miseries everywhere more and
		more prevail, we shall see material enough for revolution.
		At all turns, a man who will <em>do</em> faithfully, needs to believe
		firmly. If he have to ask at every turn the world&#8217;s
		suffrage; if he cannot dispense with the world&#8217;s
		suffrage, and make his own suffrage serve, he is a poor
		eye-servant; the work committed to him will be <em>mis</em>done.
		Every such man is a daily contributor to the
		inevitable downfall. Whatsoever work he does, dishonestly,
		with an eye to the outward look of it, is a
		new offence, parent of new misery to somebody or
		other. Offences accumulate till they become insupportable;
		and are then violently burst through, cleared
		off as by explosion. Dante&#8217;s sublime Catholicism, incredible
		now in theory, and defaced still worse by
		faithless, doubting and dishonest practice, has to be
		torn asunder by a Luther; Shakspeare&#8217;s noble feudalism,
		as beautiful as it once looked and was, has to
		end in a French Revolution. The accumulation of
		offences is, as we say, too literally <em>exploded</em>, blasted
		asunder volcanically; and there are long troublous
		periods before matters come to a settlement again.</p>

		<p>Surely it were mournful enough to look only at this
		face of the matter, and find in all human opinions and
		arrangements merely the fact that they were uncertain,
		temporary, subject to the law of death! At bottom, it
		is not so: all death, here too we find, is but of the
		body, not of the essence or soul; all destruction, by
		violent revolution or howsoever it be, is but new
		creation on a wider scale. Odinism was <i>Valour</i>; Christianism
		was <i>Humility</i>, a nobler kind of Valour. No
		thought that ever dwelt honestly as true in the heart
		of man but <em>was</em> an honest insight into God&#8217;s truth on
		man&#8217;s part, and <em>has</em> an essential truth in it which
		endures through all changes, an everlasting possession
		for us all. And, on the other hand, what a melancholy
		notion is that, which has to represent all men, in all
		countries and times except our own, as having spent
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page351" name="page351"></a>351</span>their life in blind condemnable error, mere lost Pagans,
		Scandinavians, Mahometans, only that we might have
		the true ultimate knowledge! All generations of men
		were lost and wrong, only that this present little section
		of a generation might be saved and right. They all
		marched forward there, all generations since the beginning
		of the world, like the Russian soldiers into the
		ditch of Schweidnitz Fort, only to fill-up the ditch with
		their dead bodies, that we might march-over and take
		the place! It is an incredible hypothesis.</p>

		<p>Such incredible hypothesis we have seen maintained
		with fierce emphasis; and this or the other poor individual
		man, with his sect of individual men, marching
		as over the dead bodies of all men, towards sure
		victory: but when he too, with his hypothesis and
		ultimate infallible credo, sank into the ditch, and became
		a dead body, what was to be said?&#8212;Withal, it
		is an important fact in the nature of man, that he
		tends to reckon his own insight as final, and goes upon
		it as such. He will always do it, I suppose, in one or
		the other way; but it must be in some wider, wiser
		way than this. Are not all true men that live, or that
		ever lived, soldiers of the same army, enlisted, under
		Heaven&#8217;s captaincy, to do battle against the same
		enemy, the Empire of Darkness and Wrong? Why
		should we misknow one another, fight not against the
		enemy but against ourselves, from mere difference of
		uniform? All uniforms shall be good, so they hold in
		them true valiant men. All fashions of arms, the Arab
		turban and swift scimetar, Thor&#8217;s strong hammer smiting
		down <i>Jötuns</i>, shall be welcome. Luther&#8217;s battle-voice,
		Dante&#8217;s march-melody, all genuine things are
		with us, not against us. We are all under one Captain,
		soldiers of the same host.&#8212;Let us now look a little at
		this Luther&#8217;s fighting; what kind of battle it was, and
		how he comported himself in it. Luther too was of
		our spiritual Heroes; a Prophet to his country and
		time.</p>

		<p>As introductory to the whole, a remark about Idolatry
		will perhaps be in place here. One of Mahomet&#8217;s
		characteristics, which indeed belongs to all Prophets,
		is unlimited implacable zeal against Idolatry. It is the
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page352" name="page352"></a>352</span>grand theme of Prophets: Idolatry, the worshipping
		of dead Idols as the Divinity, is a thing they cannot
		away-with, but have to denounce continually, and brand
		with inexpiable reprobation; it is the chief of all the
		sins they see done under the sun. This is worth noting.
		We will not enter here into the theological question
		about Idolatry. Idol is <i>Eidolon</i>, a thing seen, a symbol.
		It is not God, but a Symbol of God; and perhaps
		one may question whether any the most benighted mortal
		ever took it for more than a Symbol. I fancy, he did
		not think that the poor image his own hands had made
		<em>was</em> God; but that God was emblemed by it, that God
		was in it some way or another. And now in this sense,
		one may ask, Is not all worship whatsoever a worship
		by Symbols, by <i>eidola</i>, or things seen? Whether <em>seen</em>,
		rendered visible as an image or picture to the bodily
		eye; or visible only to the inward eye, to the imagination,
		to the intellect: this makes a superficial, but no
		substantial difference. It is still a Thing Seen, significant
		of Godhead; an Idol. The most rigorous Puritan
		has his Confession of Faith, and intellectual Representation
		of Divine things, and worships thereby;
		thereby is worship first made possible for him. All
		creeds, liturgies, religious forms, conceptions that fitly
		invest religious feelings, are in this sense <i>eidola</i>, things
		seen. All worship whatsoever must proceed by Symbols,
		by Idols:&#8212;we may say, all Idolatry is comparative,
		and the worst Idolatry is only <em>more</em> idolatrous.</p>

		<p>Where, then, lies the evil of it? some fatal evil must
		lie in it, or earnest prophetic men would not on all
		hands so reprobate it. Why is Idolatry so hateful to
		Prophets? It seems to me as if, in the worship of
		those poor wooden symbols, the thing that had chiefly
		provoked the Prophet, and filled his inmost soul with
		indignation and aversion, was not exactly what suggested
		itself to his own thought, and came out of him
		in words to others, as the thing. The rudest heathen
		that worshipped Canopus, or the Caabah Black-Stone,
		he, as we saw, was superior to the horse that worshipped
		nothing at all! Nay there was a kind of lasting merit
		in that poor act of his; analogous to what is still
		meritorious in Poets: recognition of a certain endless
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page353" name="page353"></a>353</span><em>divine</em> beauty and significance in stars and all natural
		objects whatsoever. Why should the Prophet so mercilessly
		condemn him? The poorest mortal worshipping
		his Fetish, while his heart is full of it, may be an
		object of pity, of contempt and avoidance, if you will;
		but cannot surely be an object of hatred. Let his heart
		<em>be</em> honestly full of it, the whole space of his dark narrow
		mind illuminated thereby; in one word, let him entirely
		<em>believe</em> in his Fetish,&#8212;it will then be, I should say, if
		not well with him, yet as well as it can readily be made
		to be, and you will leave him alone, unmolested there.</p>

		<p>But here enters the fatal circumstance of Idolatry,
		that, in the era of the Prophets, no man&#8217;s mind <em>is</em> any
		longer honestly filled with his Idol or Symbol. Before
		the Prophet can arise who, seeing through it, knows
		it to be mere wood, many men must have begun dimly
		to doubt that it was little more. Condemnable Idolatry
		is <em>insincere</em> Idolatry. Doubt has eaten-out the heart
		of it: a human soul is seen clinging spasmodically to
		an Ark of the Covenant, which it half-feels now to have
		become a Phantasm. This is one of the balefulest
		sights. Souls are no longer <em>filled</em> with their Fetish;
		but only pretend to be filled, and would fain make themselves
		feel that they are filled. &#8220;You do not believe,&#8221;
		said Coleridge; &#8220;you only believe that you believe.&#8221;
		It is the final scene in all kinds of Worship and Symbolism;
		the sure symptom that death is now nigh. It is
		equivalent to what we call Formulism, and Worship of
		Formulas, in these days of ours. No more immoral
		act can be done by a human creature; for it is the
		beginning of all immorality, or rather it is the impossibility
		henceforth of any morality whatsoever: the innermost
		moral soul is paralysed thereby, cast into fatal
		magnetic sleep! Men are no longer <em>sincere</em> men. I
		do not wonder that the earnest man denounces this,
		brands it, prosecutes it with unextinguishable aversion.
		He and it, all good and it, are at death-feud. Blamable
		Idolatry is <i>Cant</i>, and even what one may call Sincere-Cant.
		Sincere-Cant: that is worth thinking of! Every
		sort of Worship ends with this phasis.</p>

		<p>I find Luther to have been a Breaker of Idols, no
		less than any other Prophet. The wooden gods of the
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page354" name="page354"></a>354</span>Koreish, made of timber and bees-wax, were not more
		hateful to Mahomet than Tetzel&#8217;s Pardons of Sin, made
		of sheepskin and ink, were to Luther. It is the property
		of every Hero, in every time, in every place and situation,
		that he come back to reality; that he stand upon
		things, and not shows of things. According as he loves,
		and venerates, articulately or with deep speechless
		thought, the awful realities of things, so will the hollow
		shows of things, however regular, decorous, accredited
		by Koreishes or Conclaves, be intolerable and detestable
		to him. Protestantism too is the work of a Prophet:
		the prophet-work of that sixteenth century. The
		first stroke of honest demolition to an ancient thing
		grown false and idolatrous; preparatory afar off to a
		new thing, which shall be true, and authentically
		divine!&#8212;</p>

		<p>At first view it might seem as if Protestantism were
		entirely destructive to this that we call Hero-worship,
		and represent as the basis of all possible good, religious
		or social, for mankind. One often hears it said that
		Protestantism introduced a new era, radically different
		from any the world had ever seen before: the era of
		&#8216;private judgment,&#8217; as they call it. By this revolt
		against the Pope, every man became his own Pope; and
		learnt, among other things, that he must never trust
		any Pope, or spiritual Hero-captain, any more! Whereby,
		is not spiritual union, all hierarchy and subordination
		among men, henceforth an impossibility? So we
		hear it said.&#8212;Now I need not deny that Protestantism
		was a revolt against spiritual sovereignties, Popes and
		much else. Nay I will grant that English Puritanism,
		revolt against earthly sovereignties, was the second act
		of it; that the enormous French Revolution itself was
		the third act, whereby all sovereignties earthly and
		spiritual were, as might seem, abolished or made sure
		of abolition. Protestantism is the grand root from
		which our whole subsequent European History branches
		out. For the spiritual will always body itself forth in
		the temporal history of men; the spiritual is the beginning
		of the temporal. And now, sure enough, the cry
		is everywhere for Liberty and Equality, Independence
		and so forth: instead of <i>Kings</i>, Ballot-boxes and
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page355" name="page355"></a>355</span>Electoral suffrages; it seems made out that any Hero-sovereign,
		or loyal obedience of men to a man, in things
		temporal or things spiritual, has passed away forever
		from the world. I should despair of the world altogether,
		if so. One of my deepest convictions is, that
		it is not so. Without sovereigns, true sovereigns,
		temporal and spiritual, I see nothing possible but an
		anarchy: the hatefulest of things. But I find Protestantism,
		whatever anarchic democracy it have produced,
		to be the beginning of new genuine sovereignty and
		order. I find it to be a revolt against <em>false</em> sovereigns;
		the painful but indispensable first preparative for <em>true</em>
		sovereigns getting place among us! This is worth
		explaining a little.</p>

		<p>Let us remark, therefore, in the first place, that this
		of &#8216;private judgment&#8217; is, at bottom, not a new thing
		in the world, but only new at that epoch of the world.
		There is nothing generically new or peculiar in the
		Reformation; it was a return to Truth and Reality in
		opposition to Falsehood and Semblance, as all kinds
		of Improvement and genuine Teaching are and have
		been. Liberty of private judgment, if we will consider
		it, must at all times have existed in the world. Dante
		had not put-out his eyes, or tied shackles on himself;
		he was at home in that Catholicism of his, a free-seeing
		soul in it, if many a poor Hogstraten, Tetzel and Dr.
		Eck had now become slaves in it. Liberty of judgment?
		No iron chain, or outward force of any kind,
		could ever compel the soul of a man to believe or to
		disbelieve: it is his own indefeasible light, that judgment
		of his; he will reign, and believe there, by the
		grace of God alone! The sorriest sophistical Bellarmine,
		preaching sightless faith and passive obedience,
		must first, by some kind of <em>conviction</em>, have abdicated
		his right to be convinced. His &#8216;private judgment&#8217;
		indicated that, as the advisablest step <em>he</em> could take.
		The right of private judgment will subsist, in full force,
		wherever true men subsist. A true man <em>believes</em> with his
		whole judgment, with all the illumination and discernment
		that is in him, and has always so believed. A
		false man, only struggling to &#8216;believe that he believes,&#8217;
		will naturally manage it in some other way. Protestantism
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page356" name="page356"></a>356</span>said to this latter, Woe! and to the former,
		Well done! At bottom, it was no new saying; it was
		a return to all old sayings that ever had been said.
		Be genuine, be sincere: that was, once more, the
		meaning of it. Mahomet believed with his whole mind;
		Odin with his whole mind,&#8212;he, and all <em>true</em> Followers
		of Odinism. They, by their private judgment, had
		&#8216;judged&#8217;&#8212;<em>so</em>.</p>

		<p>And now, I venture to assert, that the exercise of
		private judgment, faithfully gone about, does by no
		means necessarily end in selfish independence, isolation;
		but rather ends necessarily in the opposite of that. It
		is not honest inquiry that makes anarchy; but it is
		error, insincerity, half-belief and untruth that make it.
		A man protesting against error is on the way towards
		uniting himself with all men that believe in truth.
		There is no communion possible among men who believe
		only in hearsays. The heart of each is lying dead; has
		no power of sympathy even with <em>things</em>,&#8212;or he would
		believe <em>them</em> and not hearsays. No sympathy even with
		things; how much less with his fellow-men! He cannot
		unite with men; he is an anarchic man. Only in
		a world of sincere men is unity possible;&#8212;and there, in
		the longrun, it is as good as <em>certain</em>.</p>

		<p>For observe one thing, a thing too often left out of
		view, or rather altogether lost sight of, in this controversy:
		That it is not necessary a man should himself
		have <em>discovered</em> the truth he is to believe in, and never
		so <em>sincerely</em> to believe in. A Great Man, we said, was
		always sincere, as the first condition of him. But a
		man need not be great in order to be sincere; that is
		not the necessity of Nature and all Time, but only of
		certain corrupt unfortunate epochs of Time. A man
		can believe, and make his own, in the most genuine
		way, what he has received from another;&#8212;and with
		boundless gratitude to that other! The merit of <em>originality</em>
		is not novelty; it is sincerity. The believing
		man is the original man; whatsoever he believes, he
		believes it for himself, not for another. Every son of
		Adam can become a sincere man, an original man, in
		this sense; no mortal is doomed to be an insincere
		man. Whole ages, what we call ages of Faith, are
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page357" name="page357"></a>357</span>original; all men in them, or the most of men in them,
		sincere. These are the great and fruitful ages: every
		worker, in all spheres, is a worker not on semblance but
		on substance; every work issues in a result: the general
		sum of such work is great; for all of it, as genuine,
		tends towards one goal; all of it is <em>additive</em>, none of it
		subtractive. There is true union, true kingship, loyalty,
		all true and blessed things, so far as the poor Earth
		can produce blessedness for men.</p>

		<p>Hero-worship? Ah me, that a man be self-subsistent,
		original, true, or what we call it, is surely the
		farthest in the world from indisposing him to reverence
		and believe other men&#8217;s truth! It only disposes, necessitates
		and invincibly compels him to disbelieve other
		men&#8217;s dead formulas, hearsays and untruths. A man
		embraces truth with his eyes open, and because his eyes
		are open: does he need to shut them before he can love
		his Teacher of truth? He alone can love, with a right
		gratitude and genuine loyalty of soul, the Hero-Teacher
		who has delivered him out of darkness into light. Is
		not such a one a true Hero and Serpent-queller; worthy
		of all reverence! The black monster, Falsehood, our
		one enemy in this world, lies prostrate by his valour;
		it was he that conquered the world for us!&#8212;See, accordingly,
		was not Luther himself reverenced as a true
		Pope, or Spiritual Father, <em>being</em> verily such? Napoleon,
		from amid boundless revolt of Sansculottism, became
		a King. Hero-worship never dies, nor can die.
		Loyalty and Sovereignty are everlasting in the world:&#8212;and
		there is this in them, that they are grounded not
		on garnitures and semblances, but on realities and
		sincerities. Not by shutting your eyes, your &#8216;private
		judgment;&#8217; no, but by opening them, and by having
		something to see! Luther&#8217;s message was deposition
		and abolition to all false Popes and Potentates, but life
		and strength, though afar off, to new genuine ones.</p>

		<p>All this of Liberty and Equality, Electoral suffrages,
		Independence and so forth, we will take, therefore, to
		be a temporary phenomenon, by no means a final one.
		Though likely to last a long time, with sad enough embroilments
		for us all, we must welcome it, as the penalty
		of sins that are past, the pledge of inestimable benefits
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page358" name="page358"></a>358</span>that are coming. In all ways, it behoved men to quit
		simulacra and return to fact; cost what it might, that
		did behove to be done. With spurious Popes, and Believers
		having no private judgment,&#8212;quacks pretending
		to command over dupes,&#8212;what can you do? Misery
		and mischief only. You cannot make an association
		out of insincere men; you cannot build an edifice except
		by plummet and level,&#8212;at <em>right</em>-angles to one another!
		In all this wild revolutionary work, from Protestantism
		downwards, I see the blessedest result preparing itself:
		not abolition of Hero-worship, but rather what I would
		call a whole World of Heroes. If Hero mean <i>sincere
		man</i>, why may not every one of us be a Hero? A world
		all sincere, a believing world: the like has been; the
		like will again be,&#8212;cannot help being. That were the
		right sort of Worshippers for Heroes: never could
		the truly Better be so reverenced as where all were True
		and Good!&#8212;But we must hasten to Luther and his
		Life.</p>

		<p class="post_thoughtbreak">Luther&#8217;s birthplace was Eisleben in Saxony; he came
		into the world there on the 10th of November 1483.
		It was an accident that gave this honour to Eisleben.
		His parents, poor mine-labourers in a village of that
		region, named Mohra, had gone to the Eisleben Winter-Fair:
		in the tumult of this scene the Frau Luther was
		taken with travail, found refuge in some poor house
		there, and the boy she bore was named <span class="special_emphasis">Martin Luther</span>.
		Strange enough to reflect upon it. This poor Frau
		Luther, she had gone with her husband to make her
		small merchandisings; perhaps to sell the lock of yarn
		she had been spinning, to buy the small winter-necessaries
		for her narrow hut or household; in the whole
		world, that day, there was not a more entirely unimportant-looking
		pair of people than this Miner and his
		Wife. And yet what were all Emperors, Popes and
		Potentates, in comparison? There was born here, once
		more, a Mighty Man; whose light was to flame as the
		beacon over long centuries and epochs of the world; the
		whole world and its history was waiting for this man.
		It is strange, it is great. It leads us back to another
		Birth-hour, in a still meaner environment, Eighteen
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page359" name="page359"></a>359</span>Hundred years ago,&#8212;of which it is fit that we <em>say</em>
		nothing, that we think only in silence; for what words
		are there! The Age of Miracles past? The Age of
		Miracles is forever here!&#8212;</p>

		<p>I find it altogether suitable to Luther&#8217;s function in
		this Earth, and doubtless wisely ordered to that end
		by the Providence presiding over him and us and all
		things, that he was born poor, and brought-up poor, one
		of the poorest of men. He had to beg, as the schoolchildren
		in those times did; singing for alms and bread,
		from door to door. Hardship, rigorous Necessity was
		the poor boy&#8217;s companion; no man nor no thing would
		put-on a false face to flatter Martin Luther. Among
		things, not among the shows of things, had he to grow.
		A boy of rude figure, yet with weak health, with his
		large greedy soul, full of all faculty and sensibility, he
		suffered greatly. But it was his task to get acquainted
		with <em>realities</em>, and keep acquainted with them, at whatever
		cost: his task was to bring the whole world back to
		reality, for it had dwelt too long with semblance! A
		youth nursed-up in wintry whirlwinds, in desolate darkness
		and difficulty, that he may step-forth at last from
		his stormy Scandinavia, strong as a true man, as a god:
		a Christian Odin,&#8212;a right Thor once more, with his
		thunder-hammer, to smite asunder ugly enough <i>Jötuns</i>
		and Giant-monsters!</p>

		<p>Perhaps the turning incident of his life, we may
		fancy, was that death of his friend Alexis, by lightning,
		at the gate of Erfurt. Luther had struggled-up through
		boyhood, better and worse; displaying, in spite of all
		hindrances, the largest intellect, eager to learn: his
		father judging doubtless that he might promote himself
		in the world, set him upon the study of Law. This was
		the path to rise; Luther, with little will in it either
		way, had consented: he was now nineteen years of age.
		Alexis and he had been to see the old Luther people at
		Mansfeldt; were got back again near Erfurt, when a
		thunderstorm came on; the bolt struck Alexis, he fell
		dead at Luther&#8217;s feet. What is this Life of ours?&#8212;gone
		in a moment, burnt-up like a scroll, into the blank
		Eternity! What are all earthly preferments, Chancellorships,
		Kingships? They lie shrunk together&#8212;there!
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page360" name="page360"></a>360</span>The Earth has opened on them; in a moment
		they are not, and Eternity is. Luther, struck to the
		heart, determined to devote himself to God and God&#8217;s
		service alone. In spite of all dissuasions from his
		father and others, he became a Monk in the Augustine
		Convent at Erfurt.</p>

		<p>This was probably the first light-point in the history
		of Luther, his purer will now first decisively uttering
		itself; but, for the present, it was still as one light-point
		in an element all of darkness. He says he was a
		pious monk, <i>ich bin ein frommer Mönch gewesen</i>; faithfully,
		painfully struggling to work-out the truth of this
		high act of his; but it was to little purpose. His misery
		had not lessened; had rather, as it were, increased into
		infinitude. The drudgeries he had to do, as novice
		in his Convent, all sorts of slave-work, were not his
		grievance: the deep earnest soul of the man had fallen
		into all manner of black scruples, dubitations; he believed
		himself likely to die soon, and far worse than
		die. One hears with a new interest for poor Luther
		that, at this time, he lived in terror of the unspeakable
		misery; fancied that he was doomed to eternal reprobation.
		Was it not the humble sincere nature of the
		man? What was he, that he should be raised to
		Heaven! He that had known only misery, and mean
		slavery: the news was too blessed to be credible. It
		could not become clear to him how, by fasts, vigils,
		formalities and mass-work, a man&#8217;s soul could be
		saved. He fell into the blackest wretchedness; had
		to wander staggering as on the verge of bottomless
		Despair.</p>

		<p>It must have been a most blessed discovery, that of
		an old Latin Bible which he found in the Erfurt Library
		about this time. He had never seen the Book before.
		It taught him another lesson than that of fasts and
		vigils. A brother monk too, of pious experience, was
		helpful. Luther learned now that a man was saved
		not by singing masses, but by the infinite grace of God:
		a more credible hypothesis. He gradually got himself
		founded, as on the rock. No wonder he should venerate
		the Bible, which had brought this blessed help to him.
		He prized it as the Word of the Highest must be prized
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page361" name="page361"></a>361</span>by such a man. He determined to hold by that; as
		through life and to death he firmly did.</p>

		<p>This, then, is his deliverance from darkness, his final
		triumph over darkness, what we call his conversion;
		for himself the most important of all epochs. That he
		should now grow daily in peace and clearness; that,
		unfolding now the great talents and virtues implanted
		in him, he should rise to importance in his Convent, in
		his country, and be found more and more useful in all
		honest business of life, is a natural result. He was
		sent on missions by his Augustine Order, as a man of
		talent and fidelity fit to do their business well: the
		Elector of Saxony, Friedrich, named the Wise, a truly
		wise and just prince, had cast his eye on him as a valuable
		person; made him Professor in his new University
		of Wittenberg, Preacher too at Wittenberg; in both
		which capacities, as in all duties he did, this Luther, in
		the peaceable sphere of common life, was gaining more
		and more esteem with all good men.</p>

		<p>It was in his twenty-seventh year that he first saw
		Rome; being sent thither, as I said, on mission from
		his Convent. Pope Julius the Second, and what was
		going-on at Rome, must have filled the mind of Luther
		with amazement. He had come as to the Sacred City,
		throne of God&#8217;s Highpriest on Earth; and he found
		it&#8212;what we know! Many thoughts it must have given
		the man; many which we have no record of, which
		perhaps he did not himself know how to utter. This
		Rome, this scene of false priests, clothed not in the
		beauty of holiness, but in far other vesture, is <em>false</em>:
		but what is it to Luther? A mean man he, how shall
		he reform a world? That was far from his thoughts.
		A humble, solitary man, why should he at all meddle
		with the world? It was the task of quite higher men
		than he. His business was to guide his own footsteps
		wisely through the world. Let him do his own obscure
		duty in it well; the rest, horrible and dismal as it looks,
		is in God&#8217;s hand, not in his.</p>

		<p>It is curious to reflect what might have been the issue,
		had Roman Popery happened to pass this Luther by;
		to go on in its great wasteful orbit, and not come
		athwart his little path, and force him to assault it!
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page362" name="page362"></a>362</span>Conceivable enough that, in this case, he might have
		held his peace about the abuses of Rome; left Providence,
		and God on high, to deal with them! A modest
		quiet man; not prompt he to attack irreverently persons
		in authority. His clear task, as I say, was to do his
		own duty; to walk wisely in this world of confused
		wickedness, and save his own soul alive. But the
		Roman Highpriesthood did come athwart him: afar
		off at Wittenberg he, Luther, could not get lived in
		honesty for it; he remonstrated, resisted, came to
		extremity; was struck-at, struck again, and so it came
		to wager of battle between them! This is worth attending
		to in Luther&#8217;s history. Perhaps no man of so
		humble, peaceable a disposition ever filled the world
		with contention. We cannot but see that he would
		have loved privacy, quiet diligence in the shade; that
		it was against his will he ever became a notoriety.
		Notoriety: what would that do for him? The goal of
		his march through this world was the Infinite Heaven;
		an indubitable goal for him: in a few years, he should
		either have attained that, or lost it forever! We will
		say nothing at all, I think, of that sorrowfulest of
		theories, of its being some mean shopkeeper grudge,
		of the Augustine Monk against the Dominican, that first
		kindled the wrath of Luther, and produced the Protestant
		Reformation. We will say to the people who maintain
		it, if indeed any such exist now: Get first into the
		sphere of thought by which it is so much as possible to
		judge of Luther, or of any man like Luther, otherwise
		than distractedly; we may then begin arguing with you.</p>

		<p>The Monk Tetzel, sent out carelessly in the way of
		trade, by Leo Tenth,&#8212;who merely wanted to raise a
		little money, and for the rest seems to have been a
		Pagan rather than a Christian, so far as he was anything,&#8212;arrived
		at Wittenberg, and drove his scandalous
		trade there. Luther&#8217;s flock bought Indulgences: in the
		confessional of his Church, people pleaded to him that
		they had already got their sins pardoned. Luther, if
		he would not be found wanting at his own post, a false
		sluggard and coward at the very centre of the little
		space of ground that was his own and no other man&#8217;s,
		had to step-forth against Indulgences, and declare aloud
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page363" name="page363"></a>363</span>that <em>they</em> were a futility and sorrowful mockery, that
		no man&#8217;s sins could be pardoned by <em>them</em>. It was the
		beginning of the whole Reformation. We know how
		it went; forward from this first public challenge of
		Tetzel, on the last day of October 1517, through remonstrance
		and argument;&#8212;spreading ever wider, rising
		ever higher; till it became unquenchable, and enveloped
		all the world. Luther&#8217;s heart&#8217;s-desire was to have this
		grief and other griefs amended; his thought was still
		far other than that of introducing separation in the
		Church, or revolting against the Pope, Father of
		Christendom.&#8212;The elegant Pagan Pope cared little
		about this Monk and his doctrines; wished, however,
		to have done with the noise of him: in a space of some
		three years, having tried various softer methods, he
		thought good to end it by <em>fire</em>. He dooms the Monk&#8217;s
		writings to be burnt by the hangman, and his body to
		be sent bound to Rome,&#8212;probably for a similar purpose.
		It was the way they had ended with Huss, with Jerome,
		the century before. A short argument, fire. Poor
		Huss: he came to that Constance Council, with all
		imaginable promises and safe-conducts; an earnest,
		not rebellious kind of man: they laid him instantly in
		a stone dungeon &#8216;three-feet wide, six-feet high, seven-feet
		long;&#8217; <em>burnt</em> the true voice of him out of this
		world; choked it in smoke and fire. That was <em>not</em>
		well done!</p>

		<p>I, for one, pardon Luther for now altogether revolting
		against the Pope. The elegant Pagan, by this fire-decree
		of his, had kindled into noble just wrath the
		bravest heart then living in this world. The bravest, if
		also one of the humblest, peaceablest; it was now
		kindled. These words of mine, words of truth and
		soberness, aiming faithfully, as human inability would
		allow, to promote God&#8217;s truth on Earth, and save men&#8217;s
		souls, you, God&#8217;s vicegerent on earth, answer them by
		the hangman and fire? You will burn me and them,
		for answer to the God&#8217;s-message they strove to bring
		you? <em>You</em> are not God&#8217;s vicegerent; you are another&#8217;s
		than his, I think I take your Bull, as an emparchmented
		Lie, and burn <em>it</em>. You will do what you see
		good next: this is what I do.&#8212;It was on the 10th of
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page364" name="page364"></a>364</span>December 1520, three years after the beginning of the
		business, that Luther, &#8216;with a great concourse of
		people,&#8217; took this indignant step of burning the Pope&#8217;s
		fire-decree &#8216;at the Elster-Gate of Wittenberg.&#8217; Wittenberg
		looked on &#8216;with shoutings;&#8217; the whole world was
		looking on. The Pope should not have provoked that
		&#8216;shout&#8217;! It was the shout of the awakening of nations.
		The quiet German heart, modest, patient of much, had
		at length got more than it could bear. Formulism,
		Pagan Popeism, and other Falsehood and corrupt Semblance
		had ruled long enough: and here once more was
		a man found who durst tell all men that God&#8217;s world
		stood not on semblances but on realities; that Life was
		a truth, and not a lie!</p>

		<p>At bottom, as was said above, we are to consider
		Luther as a Prophet Idol-breaker; a bringer-back of
		men to reality. It is the function of great men and
		teachers. Mahomet said, These idols of yours are wood;
		you put wax and oil on them, the flies stick on them:
		they are not God, I tell you, they are black wood!
		Luther said to the Pope, This thing of yours that you
		call a Pardon of Sins, it is a bit of rag-paper with ink.
		It <em>is</em> nothing else; it, and so much like it, is nothing
		else. God alone can pardon sins. Popeship, spiritual
		Fatherhood of God&#8217;s Church, is that a vain semblance,
		of cloth and parchment? It is an awful fact. God&#8217;s
		Church is not a semblance, Heaven and Hell are not
		semblances. I stand on this, since you drive me to it.
		Standing on this, I a poor German monk am stronger
		than you all. I stand solitary, friendless, but on God&#8217;s
		Truth; you with your tiaras, triple-hats, with your
		treasuries and armories, thunders spiritual and temporal,
		stand on the Devil&#8217;s Lie, and are not so strong!&#8212;</p>

		<p>The Diet of Worms, Luther&#8217;s appearance there on
		the 17th of April 1521, may be considered as the greatest
		scene in Modern European History; the point, indeed,
		from which the whole subsequent history of civilisation
		takes its rise. After multiplied negotiations, disputations,
		it had come to this. The young Emperor Charles
		Fifth, with all the Princes of Germany, Papal nuncios,
		dignitaries spiritual and temporal, are assembled there:
		Luther is to appear and answer for himself, whether he
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page365" name="page365"></a>365</span>will recant or not. The world&#8217;s pomp and power sits
		there on this hand: on that, stands-up for God&#8217;s Truth,
		one man, the poor miner Hans Luther&#8217;s Son. Friends
		had reminded him of Huss, advised him not to go; he
		would not be advised. A large company of friends rode-out
		to meet him, with still more earnest warnings; he
		answered, &#8220;Were there as many Devils in Worms as
		there are roof-tiles, I would on.&#8221; The people, on the
		morrow, as he went to the Hall of the Diet, crowded
		the windows and housetops, some of them calling out
		to him, in solemn words, not to recant: &#8220;Whosoever
		denieth me before men!&#8221; they cried to him,&#8212;as in a
		kind of solemn petition and adjuration. Was it not in
		reality our petition too, the petition of the whole world,
		lying in dark bondage of soul, paralysed under a black
		spectral Nightmare and triple-hatted Chimera, calling
		itself Father in God, and what not: &#8220;Free us; it rests
		with thee; desert us not!&#8221;</p>

		<p>Luther did not desert us. His speech, of two hours,
		distinguished itself by its respectful, wise and honest
		tone; submissive to whatsoever could lawfully claim
		submission, not submissive to any more than that. His
		writings, he said, were partly his own, partly derived
		from the Word of God. As to what was his own,
		human infirmity entered into it; unguarded anger,
		blindness, many things doubtless which it were a blessing
		for him could he abolish altogether. But as to
		what stood on sound truth and the Word of God, he
		could not recant it. How could he? &#8220;Confute me,&#8221;
		he concluded, &#8220;by proofs of Scripture, or else by plain
		just arguments: I cannot recant otherwise. For it is
		neither safe nor prudent to do ought against conscience.
		Here stand I; I can do no other: God assist me!&#8221;&#8212;It
		is, as we say, the greatest moment in the Modern
		History of Men. English Puritanism, England and its
		Parliaments, Americas, and vast work these two centuries;
		French Revolution, Europe and its work everywhere
		at present: the germ of it all lay there: had
		Luther in that moment done other, it had all been otherwise!
		The European World was asking him: Am I
		to sink ever lower into falsehood, stagnant putrescence,
		loathsome accursed death; or, with whatever paroxysm,
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page366" name="page366"></a>366</span>to cast the falsehoods out of me, and be cured and
		live?&#8212;</p>

		<p class="post_thoughtbreak">Great wars, contentions and disunion followed out
		of this Reformation; which last down to our day, and
		are yet far from ended. Great talk and crimination has
		been made about these. They are lamentable, undeniable;
		but after all what has Luther or his cause to do
		with them? It seems strange reasoning to charge the
		Reformation with all this. When Hercules turned the
		purifying river into King Augeas&#8217;s stables, I have no
		doubt the confusion that resulted was considerable all
		around: but I think it was not Hercules&#8217;s blame; it
		was some other&#8217;s blame! The Reformation might
		bring what results it liked when it came, but the Reformation
		simply could not help coming. To all Popes
		and Popes&#8217; advocates, expostulating, lamenting and
		accusing, the answer of the world is: Once for all,
		your Popehood has become untrue. No matter how
		good it was, how good you say it is, we cannot believe
		it; the light of our whole mind, given us to walk-by
		from Heaven above, finds it henceforth a thing unbelievable.
		We will not believe it, we will not try to
		believe it,&#8212;we dare not! The thing is <em>untrue</em>; we
		were traitors against the Giver of all Truth, if we durst
		pretend to think it true. Away with it; let whatsoever
		likes come in the place of it: with <em>it</em> we can have
		no farther trade!&#8212;Luther and his Protestantism is
		not responsible for wars; the false Simulacra that
		forced him to protest, they are responsible. Luther
		did what every man that God has made has not only
		the right, but lies under the sacred duty, to do: answered
		a Falsehood when it questioned him, Dost thou
		believe me?&#8212;No!&#8212;At what cost soever, without counting
		of costs, this thing behoved to be done. Union,
		organisation spiritual and material, a far nobler than,
		any Popedom or Feudalism in their truest days, I never
		doubt, is coming for the world; sure to come. But
		on Fact alone, not on Semblance and Simulacrum, will
		it be able either to come, or to stand when come. With
		union grounded on falsehood, and ordering us to speak
		and act lies, we will not have anything to do. Peace?
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page367" name="page367"></a>367</span>A brutal lethargy is peaceable, the noisome grave is
		peaceable. We hope for a living peace, not a dead one!</p>

		<p>And yet, in prizing justly the indispensable blessings
		of the New, let us not be unjust to the Old. The Old
		<em>was</em> true, if it no longer is. In Dante&#8217;s days it needed
		no sophistry, self-blinding, or other dishonesty, to get
		itself reckoned true. It was good then; nay there is
		in the soul of it a deathless good. The cry of &#8216;No
		Popery&#8217; is foolish enough in these days. The speculation
		that Popery is on the increase, building new
		chapels and so forth, may pass for one of the idlest
		ever started. Very curious: to count-up a few Popish
		chapels, listen to a few Protestant logic-choppings,&#8212;to
		much dull-droning, drowsy inanity that still calls
		itself Protestant, and say: See, Protestantism is <em>dead</em>;
		Popeism is more alive than it, will be alive after it!&#8212;Drowsy
		inanities, not a few, that call themselves Protestant
		are dead; but <i>Protestantism</i> has not died yet,
		that I hear of! Protestantism, if we will look, has in
		these days produced its Goethe, its Napoleon; German
		Literature and the French Revolution; rather considerable
		signs of life! Nay, at bottom, what else is alive
		<em>but</em> Protestantism? The life of most else that one
		meets is a galvanic one merely,&#8212;not a pleasant, not a
		lasting sort of life!</p>

		<p>Popery can build new chapels; welcome to do so, to
		all lengths. Popery cannot come back, any more than
		Paganism can,&#8212;<em>which</em> also still lingers in some
		countries. But, indeed, it is with these things, as with
		the ebbing of the sea: you look at the waves oscillating
		hither, thither on the beach; for <em>minutes</em> you cannot
		tell how it is going; look in half an hour where
		it is,&#8212;look in half a century where your Popehood is!
		Alas, would there were no greater danger to our Europe
		than the poor old Pope&#8217;s revival! Thor may as soon
		try to revive.&#8212;And withal this oscillation has a meaning.
		The poor old Popehood will not die away entirely,
		as Thor has done, for some time yet; nor ought it.
		We may say, the Old never dies till this happen, Till
		all the soul of good that was in it have got itself transfused
		into the practical New. While a good work
		remains capable of being done by the Romish form;
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page368" name="page368"></a>368</span>or, what is inclusive of all, while a <em>pious life</em> remains
		capable of being led by it, just so long, if we consider,
		will this or the other human soul adopt it, go about as
		a living witness of it. So long it will obtrude itself
		on the eye of us who reject it, till we in our practice
		too have appropriated whatsoever of truth was in it.
		Then, but also not till then, it will have no charm more
		for any man. It lasts here for a purpose. Let it last
		as long as it can.&#8212;</p>

		<p class="post_thoughtbreak">Of Luther I will add now, in reference to all these
		wars and bloodshed, the noticeable fact that none of
		them began so long as he continued living. The controversy
		did not get to fighting so long as he was there.
		To me it is proof of his greatness in all senses, this
		fact. How seldom do we find a man that has stirred-up
		some vast commotion, who does not himself perish,
		swept-away in it! Such is the usual course of revolutionists.
		Luther continued, in a good degree, sovereign
		of this greatest revolution; all Protestants, of what
		rank or function soever, looking much to him for guidance:
		and he held it peaceable, continued firm at the
		centre of it. A man to do this must have a kingly
		faculty: he must have the gift to discern at all turns
		where the true heart of the matter lies, and to plant
		himself courageously on that, as a strong true man,
		that other true men may rally round him there. He
		will not continue leader of men otherwise. Luther&#8217;s
		clear deep force of judgment, his force of all sorts, of
		<em>silence</em>, of tolerance and moderation, among others, are
		very notable in these circumstances.</p>

		<p>Tolerance, I say; a very genuine kind of tolerance:
		he distinguishes what is essential, and what is not; the
		unessential may go very much as it will. A complaint
		comes to him that such and such a Reformed Preacher,
		&#8216;will not preach without a cassock.&#8217; Well, answers
		Luther, what harm will a cassock do the man? &#8216;Let
		him have a cassock to preach in; let him have three
		cassocks if he find benefit in them!&#8217; His conduct in the
		matter of Karlstadt&#8217;s wild image-breaking; of the
		Anabaptists; of the Peasants&#8217; War, shows a noble
		strength, very different from spasmodic violence. With
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page369" name="page369"></a>369</span>sure prompt insight he discriminates what is what: a
		strong just man, he speaks-forth what is the wise
		course, and all men follow him in that. Luther&#8217;s
		Written Works give similar testimony of him. The
		dialect of these speculations is now grown obsolete for
		us; but one still reads them with a singular attraction.
		And indeed the mere grammatical diction is still legible
		enough; Luther&#8217;s merit in literary history is of the
		greatest; his dialect became the language of all writing.
		They are not well written, these Four-and-twenty
		Quartos of his; written hastily, with quite other than
		literary objects. But in no Books have I found a more
		robust, genuine, I will say noble faculty of a man than
		in these. A rugged honesty, homeliness, simplicity; a
		rugged sterling sense and strength. He flashes-out
		illumination from him; his smiting idiomatic phrases
		seem to cleave into the very secret of the matter. Good
		humour too, nay tender affection, nobleness, and depth:
		this man could have been a Poet too! He had to <em>work</em>
		an Epic Poem, not write one. I call him a great
		Thinker; as indeed his greatness of heart already betokens
		that.</p>

		<p>Richter says of Luther&#8217;s words, &#8216;his words are half-battles.&#8217;
		They may be called so. The essential quality
		of him was, that he could fight and conquer; that he
		was a right piece of human Valour. No more valiant
		man, no mortal heart to be called <em>braver</em>, that one has
		record of, ever lived in that Teutonic Kindred, whose
		character is valour. His defiance of the &#8216;Devils&#8217; in
		Worms was not a mere boast, as the like might be if
		now spoken. It was a faith of Luther&#8217;s that there were
		Devils, spiritual denizens of the Pit, continually besetting
		men. Many times, in his writings, this turns-up;
		and a most small sneer has been grounded on it by
		some. In the room of the Wartburg where he sat
		translating the Bible, they still show you a black spot
		on the wall; the strange memorial of one of these conflicts.
		Luther sat translating one of the Psalms; he
		was worn-down with long labour, with sickness, abstinence
		from food: there rose before him some hideous
		indefinable Image, which he took for the Evil One, to
		forbid his work: Luther started-up, with fiend-defiance;
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page370" name="page370"></a>370</span>flung his inkstand at the spectre, and it disappeared!
		The spot still remains there; a curious monument of
		several things. Any apothecary&#8217;s apprentice can now
		tell us what we are to think of this apparition, in a
		scientific sense: but the man&#8217;s heart that dare rise
		defiant, face to face, against Hell itself, can give no
		higher proof of fearlessness. The thing he will quail
		before exists not on this Earth or under it.&#8212;Fearless
		enough! &#8216;The Devil is aware,&#8217; writes he on one occasion,
		&#8216;that this does not proceed out of fear in me. I
		have seen and defied innumerable Devils. Duke
		George,&#8217; of Leipzig, a great enemy of his, &#8216;Duke
		George is not equal to one Devil,&#8217;&#8212;far short of a
		Devil! &#8216;If I had business at Leipzig, I would ride
		into Leipzig, though it rained Duke-Georges for nine
		days running.&#8217; What a reservoir of Dukes to ride
		into!&#8212;</p>

		<p>At the same time, they err greatly who imagine that
		this man&#8217;s courage was ferocity, mere coarse disobedient
		obstinacy and savagery, as many do. Far from
		that. There may be an absence of fear which arises
		from the absence of thought or affection, from the presence
		of hatred and stupid fury. We do not value the
		courage of the tiger highly! With Luther it was far
		otherwise; no accusation could be more unjust than
		this of mere ferocious violence brought against him.
		A most gentle heart withal, full of pity and love, as
		indeed the truly valiant heart ever is. The tiger before
		a <em>stronger</em> foe&#8212;flies: the tiger is not what we call
		valiant, only fierce and cruel. I know few things more
		touching than those soft breathings of affection, soft
		as a child&#8217;s or a mother&#8217;s, in this great wild heart of
		Luther. So honest, unadulterated with any cant;
		homely, rude in their utterance; pure as water welling
		from the rock. What, in fact, was all that downpressed
		mood of despair and reprobation, which we saw in his
		youth, but the outcome of pre-eminent thoughtful gentleness,
		affections too keen and fine? It is the course
		such men as the poor Poet Cowper fall into. Luther
		to a slight observer might have seemed a timid, weak
		man; modesty, affectionate shrinking tenderness the
		chief distinction of him. It is a noble valour which is
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page371" name="page371"></a>371</span>roused in a heart like this, once stirred-up into defiance,
		all kindled into a heavenly blaze.</p>

		<p>In Luther&#8217;s <i>Table-Talk</i>, a posthumous Book of anecdotes
		and sayings collected by his friends, the most
		interesting now of all the Books proceeding from him,
		we have many beautiful unconscious displays of the
		man, and what sort of nature he had. His behaviour
		at the deathbed of his little Daughter, so still, so great
		and loving, is among the most affecting things. He is
		resigned that his little Magdalene should die, yet longs
		inexpressibly that she might live;&#8212;follows, in awe-struck
		thought, the flight of her little soul through those
		unknown realms. Awe-struck; most heartfelt, we can
		see; and sincere,&#8212;for after all dogmatic creeds and
		articles, he feels what nothing it is that we know, or
		can know: His little Magdalene shall be with God, as
		God wills; for Luther too that is all; <i>Islam</i> is all.</p>

		<p>Once, he looks-out from his solitary Patmos, the
		Castle of Coburg, in the middle of the night: The great
		vault of Immensity, long flights of clouds sailing
		through it,&#8212;dumb, gaunt, huge:&#8212;who supports all
		that? &#8220;None ever saw the pillars of it; yet it is supported.&#8221;
		God supports it. We must know that God
		is great, that God is good; and trust, where we cannot
		see.&#8212;Returning home from Leipzig once, he is struck
		by the beauty of the harvest-fields: How it stands, that
		golden yellow corn, on its fair taper stem, its golden
		head bent, all rich and waving there,&#8212;the meek Earth,
		at God&#8217;s kind bidding, has produced it once again; the
		bread of man!&#8212;In the garden at Wittenburg one evening
		at sunset, a little bird was perched for the night:
		That little bird, says Luther, above it are the stars and
		deep Heaven of worlds; yet it has folded its little
		wings; gone trustfully to rest there as in its home:
		the Maker of it has given it too a home!&#8212;Neither
		are mirthful turns wanting: there is a great free human
		heart in this man. The common speech of him has a
		rugged nobleness, idiomatic, expressive, genuine;
		gleams here and there with beautiful poetic tints. One
		feels him to be a great brother man. His love of Music,
		indeed, is not this, as it were, the summary of all these
		affections in him? Many a wild unutterability he spoke-forth
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page372" name="page372"></a>372</span>from him in the tones of his flute. The Devils
		fled from his flute, he says. Death-defiance on the one
		hand, and such love of music on the other; I could
		call these the two opposite poles of a great soul; between
		these two all great things had room.</p>

		<p>Luther&#8217;s face is to me expressive of him; in Kranach&#8217;s
		best portraits I find the true Luther. A rude plebeian
		face; with its huge crag-like brows and bones, the
		emblem of rugged energy; at first, almost a repulsive
		face. Yet in the eyes especially there is a wild silent
		sorrow; an unnamable melancholy, the element of all
		gentle and fine affections; giving to the rest the true
		stamp of nobleness. Laughter was in this Luther, as
		we said; but tears also were there. Tears also were
		appointed him; tears and hard toil. The basis of his
		life was Sadness, Earnestness. In his latter days, after
		all triumphs and victories, he expresses himself heartily
		weary of living; he considers that God alone can and
		will regulate the course things are taking, and that
		perhaps the Day of Judgment is not far. As for him,
		he longs for one thing: that God would release him
		from his labour, and let him depart and be at rest.
		They understand little of the man who cite this in <em>dis</em>credit
		of him!&#8212;I will call this Luther a true Great Man;
		great in intellect, in courage, affection and integrity;
		one of our most lovable and precious men. Great, not
		as a hewn obelisk; but as an Alpine mountain,&#8212;so
		simple, honest, spontaneous, not setting-up to be great
		at all; there for quite another purpose than being great!
		Ah yes, unsubduable granite, piercing far and wide
		into the Heavens; yet in the clefts of it fountains, green
		beautiful valleys with flowers! A right Spiritual Hero
		and Prophet; once more, a true Son of Nature and
		Fact, for whom these centuries, and many that are to
		come yet, will be thankful to Heaven.</p>

		<p>The most interesting phasis which the Reformation
		anywhere assumes, especially for us English, is that of
		Puritanism. In Luther&#8217;s own country Protestantism
		soon dwindled into a rather barren affair: not a religion
		or faith, but rather now a theological jangling of argument,
		the proper seat of it not the heart; the essence
		of it sceptical contention: which indeed has jangled
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page373" name="page373"></a>373</span>more and more, down to Voltaireism itself,&#8212;through
		Gustavus-Adolphus contentions onward to French-Revolution
		ones! But in our Island there arose a Puritanism,
		which even got itself established as a Presbyterianism
		and National Church among the Scotch; which
		came forth as a real business of the heart; and has
		produced in the world very notable fruit. In some
		senses, one may say it is the only phasis of Protestantism
		that ever got to the rank of being a Faith, a true heart-communication
		with Heaven, and of exhibiting itself in
		History as such. We must spare a few words for Knox;
		himself a brave and remarkable man; but still more important
		as Chief Priest and Founder, which one may
		consider him to be, of the Faith that became Scotland&#8217;s,
		New England&#8217;s, Oliver Cromwell&#8217;s. History will have
		something to say about this, for some time to come!</p>

		<p>We may censure Puritanism as we please; and no
		one of us, I suppose, but would find it a very rough
		defective thing. But we, and all men, may understand
		that it was a genuine thing; for Nature has adopted
		it, and it has grown, and grows. I say sometimes, that
		all goes by wager-of-battle in this world; that <em>strength</em>,
		well understood, is the measure of all worth. Give a
		thing time; if it can succeed, it is a right thing. Look
		now at American Saxondom; and at that little Fact of
		the sailing of the Mayflower, two hundred years ago,
		from Delft Haven in Holland! Were we of open sense
		as the Greeks were, we had found a Poem here; one of
		Nature&#8217;s own Poems; such as she writes in broad facts
		over great continents. For it was properly the beginning
		of America: there were straggling settlers in
		America before, some material as of a body was there;
		but the soul of it was first this. These poor men,
		driven-out of their country, not able well to live in
		Holland, determine on settling in the New World.
		Black untamed forests are there, and wild savage
		creatures; but not so cruel as Starchamber hangmen.
		They thought the Earth would yield them food, if they
		tilled honestly; the everlasting heaven would stretch
		there too, overhead; they should be left in peace, to
		prepare for Eternity by living well in this world of
		Time; worshipping in what they thought the true, not
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page374" name="page374"></a>374</span>the idolatrous way. They clubbed their small means
		together; hired a ship, the little ship Mayflower, and
		made ready to set sail.</p>

		<p>In Neal&#8217;s <i>History of the Puritans</i><span class="footnote_marker">*</span><span class="footnote">* Neal (London, 1755), i. 490.</span> is an account
		of the ceremony of their departure: solemnity, we
		might call it rather, for it was a real act of worship.
		Their minister went down with them to the beach, and
		their brethren whom they were to leave behind; all
		joined in solemn prayer, That God would have pity on
		His poor children, and <em>go</em> with them into that waste
		wilderness, for He also had made that, He was there
		also as well as here.&#8212;Hah! These men, I think, had
		a work! The weak thing, weaker than a child, becomes
		strong one day, if it be a true thing. Puritanism was
		only despicable, laughable then; but nobody can manage
		to laugh at it now. Puritanism has got weapons and
		sinews; it has fire-arms, war-navies; it has cunning in
		its ten fingers, strength in its right arm; it can steer
		ships, fell forests, remove mountains;&#8212;it is one of the
		strongest things under the sun at present!</p>

		<p>In the history of Scotland, too, I can find properly but
		one epoch: we may say it contains nothing of world-interest
		at all but this Reformation by Knox. A poor
		barren country, full of continual broils, dissensions,
		massacrings; a people in the last state of rudeness and
		destitution, little better perhaps than Ireland at this
		day. Hungry fierce barons, not so much as able to
		form any arrangement with each other <em>how to divide</em>
		what they fleeced from these poor drudges; but obliged,
		as the Columbian Republics are at this day, to make
		of every alteration a revolution; no way of changing
		a ministry but by hanging the old ministers on gibbets:
		this is a historical spectacle of no very singular significance!
		&#8216;Bravery&#8217; enough, I doubt not; fierce fighting
		in abundance: but not braver or fiercer than that of
		their old Scandinavian Sea-king ancestors; <em>whose</em> exploits
		we have not found worth dwelling on! It is a
		country as yet without a soul: nothing developed in
		it but what is rude, external, semi-animal. And now
		at the Reformation, the internal life is kindled, as it
		were, under the ribs of this outward material death. A
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page375" name="page375"></a>375</span>cause, the noblest of causes kindles itself, like a beacon
		set on high; high as Heaven, yet attainable from Earth;&#8212;whereby
		the meanest man becomes not a Citizen only,
		but a Member of Christ&#8217;s visible Church; a veritable
		Hero, if he prove a true man!</p>

		<p>Well; this is what I mean by a whole &#8216;nation of
		heroes;&#8217; a <em>believing</em> nation. There needs not a great
		soul to make a hero; there needs a god-created soul
		which will be true to its origin; that will be a great
		soul! The like has been seen, we find. The like will
		be again seen, under wider forms than the Presbyterian:
		there can be no lasting good done till then.&#8212;Impossible!
		say some. Possible? Has it not <em>been</em>, in this world,
		as a practised fact? Did Hero-worship fail in Knox&#8217;s
		case? Or are we made of other clay now? Did the
		Westminster Confession of Faith add some new property
		to the soul of man? God made the soul of man.
		He did not doom any soul of man to live as a Hypothesis
		and Hearsay, in a world filled with such, and with the
		fatal work and fruit of such!&#8212;&#8212;</p>

		<p>But to return: This that Knox did for his Nation,
		I say, we may really call a resurrection as from death.
		It was not a smooth business; but it was welcome surely,
		and cheap at that price, had it been far rougher. On
		the whole, cheap at any price;&#8212;as life is. The people
		began to <em>live</em>: they needed first of all to do that, at what
		cost and costs soever. Scotch Literature and Thought,
		Scotch Industry; James Watt, David Hume, Walter
		Scott, Robert Burns: I find Knox and the Reformation
		acting in the heart&#8217;s core of every one of these persons
		and phenomena; I find that without the Reformation
		they would not have been. Or what of Scotland? The
		Puritanism of Scotland became that of England, of
		New England. A tumult in the High Church of Edinburgh
		spread into a universal battle and struggle over
		all these realms;&#8212;there came out, after fifty years&#8217;
		struggling, what we call the &#8216;<em>Glorious</em> Revolution,&#8217; a
		<i>Habeas-Corpus</i> Act, Free Parliaments, and much else!&#8212;Alas,
		is it not too true what we said, That many
		men in the van do always, like Russian soldiers, march
		into the ditch of Schweidnitz, and fill it up with their
		dead bodies, that the rear may pass over them dry-shod
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page376" name="page376"></a>376</span>and gain the honour? How many earnest rugged
		Cromwells, Knoxes, poor Peasant Covenants, wrestling,
		battling for very life, in rough miry places, have
		to struggle, and suffer, and fall, greatly censured, <em>bemired</em>,&#8212;before
		a beautiful Revolution of Eighty-eight
		can step-over them in official pumps and silk-stockings,
		with universal three-times-three!</p>

		<p>It seems to me hard measure that this Scottish man,
		now after three-hundred years, should have to plead
		like a culprit before the world; intrinsically for having
		been, in such way as it was then possible to be, the
		bravest of all Scotchmen! Had he been a poor Half-and-half,
		he could have crouched into the corner, like
		so many others; Scotland had not been delivered; and
		Knox had been without blame. He is the one Scotchman
		to whom, of all others, his country and the world
		owe a debt. He has to plead that Scotland would forgive
		him for having been worth to it any million &#8216;unblamable&#8217;
		Scotchmen that need no forgiveness! He
		bared his breast to the battle; had to row in French
		galleys, wander forlorn in exile, in clouds and storms;
		was censured, shot-at through his windows; had a right
		sore fighting life: if this world were his place of recompense,
		he had made but a bad venture of it. I cannot
		apologise for Knox. To him it is very indifferent, these
		two-hundred-and-fifty years or more, what men say of
		him. But we, having got above all those details of his
		battle, and living now in clearness on the fruits of his
		victory, we, for our own sake, ought to look through
		the rumours and controversies enveloping the man, into
		the man himself.</p>

		<p>For one thing, I will remark that this post of Prophet
		to his Nation was not of his seeking; Knox had lived
		forty years quietly obscure, before he became conspicuous.
		He was the son of poor parents; had got a
		college education; become a Priest; adopted the Reformation,
		and seemed well content to guide his own
		steps by the light of it, nowise unduly intruding it on
		others. He had lived as Tutor in gentlemen&#8217;s families;
		preaching when any body of persons wished to hear his
		doctrine: resolute he to walk by the truth, and speak
		the truth when called to do it; not ambitious of more;
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page377" name="page377"></a>377</span>not fancying himself capable of more. In this entirely
		obscure way he had reached the age of forty; was with
		the small body of Reformers who were standing siege
		in St Andrew&#8217;s Castle,&#8212;when one day in their chapel,
		the Preacher after finishing his exhortation to these
		fighters in the forlorn hope, said suddenly, That there
		ought to be other speakers, that all men who had a
		priest&#8217;s heart and gift in them ought now to speak;&#8212;which
		gifts and heart one of their own number, John
		Knox the name of him, had: Had he not? said the
		Preacher, appealing to all the audience: what then is
		<em>his</em> duty? The people answered affirmatively; it was
		a criminal forsaking of his post, if such a man held the
		word that was in him silent. Poor Knox was obliged
		to stand-up; he attempted to reply; he could say no
		word;&#8212;burst into a flood of tears, and ran out. It is
		worth remembering, that scene. He was in grievous
		trouble for some days. He felt what a small faculty
		was his for this great work. He felt what a baptism he
		was called to be baptised withal. He &#8216;burst into tears.&#8217;</p>

		<p>Our primary characteristic of a Hero, that he is sincere,
		applies emphatically to Knox. It is not denied
		anywhere that this, whatever might be his other qualities
		or faults, is among the truest of men. With a singular
		instinct he holds to the truth and fact; the truth alone
		is there for him, the rest a mere shadow and deceptive
		nonentity. However feeble, forlorn the reality may
		seem, on that and that only <em>can</em> he take his stand. In
		the Galleys of the River Loire, whither Knox and the
		others, after their Castle of St Andrew&#8217;s was taken, had
		been sent as Galley-slaves,&#8212;some officer or priest, one
		day, presented them an Image of the Virgin Mother,
		requiring that they, the blasphemous heretics, should
		do it reverence. Mother? Mother of God? said Knox,
		when the turn came to him: This is no Mother of God:
		this is &#8216;a <i>pented bredd</i>,&#8217;&#8212;a piece of wood, I tell you,
		with paint on it! She is fitter for swimming, I think,
		than for being worshipped, added Knox, and flung the
		thing into the river. It was not very cheap jesting
		there: but come of it what might, this thing to Knox
		was and must continue nothing other than the real truth;
		it was a <i>pented bredd</i>; worship it he would not.</p>

		<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page378" name="page378"></a>378</span>He told his fellow-prisoners, in this darkest time, to
		be of courage; the Cause they had was the true one,
		and must and would prosper; the whole world could
		not put it down. Reality is of God&#8217;s making; it is
		alone strong. How many <i>pented bredds</i>, pretending to
		be real, are fitter to swim than to be worshipped!&#8212;This
		Knox cannot live but by fact: he clings to reality
		as the shipwrecked sailor to the cliff. He is an instance
		to us how a man, by sincerity itself, becomes heroic:
		it is the grand gift he has. We find in Knox a good
		honest intellectual talent, no transcendent one;&#8212;a
		narrow, inconsiderable man, as compared with Luther:
		but in heartfelt instinctive adherence to truth, in <em>sincerity</em>,
		as we say, he has no superior; nay, one might
		ask, What equal he has? The heart of him is of the
		true Prophet cast. &#8220;He lies there,&#8221; said the Earl of
		Morton at his grave, &#8220;who never feared the face of
		man.&#8221; He resembles, more than any of the moderns,
		an Old-Hebrew Prophet. The same inflexibility, intolerance,
		rigid narrow-looking adherence to God&#8217;s truth,
		stern rebuke in the name of God to all that forsake
		truth: an Old-Hebrew Prophet in the guise of an Edinburgh
		Minister of the Sixteenth Century. We are to
		take him for that; not require him to be other.</p>

		<p>Knox&#8217;s conduct to Queen Mary, the harsh visits he
		used to make in her own palace, to reprove her there,
		have been much commented upon. Such cruelty, such
		coarseness fills us with indignation. On reading the
		actual narrative of the business, what Knox said, and
		what Knox meant, I must say one&#8217;s tragic feeling is
		rather disappointed. They are not so coarse, these
		speeches; they seem to me about as fine as the circumstances
		would permit! Knox was not there to do the
		courtier; he came on another errand. Whoever, reading
		these colloquies of his with the Queen, thinks they
		are vulgar insolences of a plebeian priest to a delicate
		high lady, mistakes the purport and essence of them
		altogether. It was unfortunately not possible to be polite
		with the Queen of Scotland, unless one proved untrue
		to the Nation and Cause of Scotland. A man who did
		not wish to see the land of his birth made a hunting-field
		for intriguing ambitious Guises, and the Cause of
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page379" name="page379"></a>379</span>God trampled underfoot of Falsehoods, Formulas and
		the Devil&#8217;s Cause, had no method of making himself
		agreeable! &#8220;Better that women weep,&#8221; said Morton,
		&#8220;than that bearded men be forced to weep.&#8221; Knox
		was the constitutional opposition-party in Scotland: the
		Nobles of the country, called by their station to take
		that post, were not found in it; Knox had to go or no
		one. The hapless Queen;&#8212;but the still more hapless
		Country, if <em>she</em> were made happy! Mary herself was
		not without sharpness enough, among her other
		qualities: &#8220;Who are you,&#8221; said she once, &#8220;that presume
		to school the nobles and sovereign of this realm?&#8221;&#8212;&#8220;Madam,
		a subject born within the same,&#8221; answered
		he. Reasonably answered! If the &#8216;subject&#8217; have truth
		to speak, it is not the &#8216;subject&#8217;s&#8217; footing that will fail
		him here.&#8212;</p>

		<p>We blame Knox for his intolerance. Well, surely
		it is good that each of us be as tolerant as possible.
		Yet, at bottom, after all the talk there is and has been
		about it, what is tolerance? Tolerance has to tolerate
		the <em>un</em>essential; and to see well what that is. Tolerance
		has to be noble, measured, just in its very wrath, when
		it can tolerate no longer. But, on the whole, we are
		not altogether here to tolerate! We are here to resist,
		to control and vanquish withal. We do not &#8216;tolerate&#8217;
		Falsehoods, Thieveries, Iniquities, when they fasten on
		us; we say to them, Thou art false, thou art not tolerable!
		We are here to extinguish Falsehoods, and put
		an end to them, in some wise way! I will not quarrel
		so much with the way; the doing of the thing is our
		great concern. In this sense Knox was, full surely,
		intolerant.</p>

		<p>A man sent to row in French Galleys, and suchlike,
		for teaching the Truth in his own land, cannot always
		be in the mildest humour! I am not prepared to say
		that Knox had a soft temper; nor do I know that
		he had what we call an ill-temper. An ill nature
		he decidedly had not. Kind honest affections dwell
		in the much-enduring, hard-worn, ever-battling man.
		That he <em>could</em> rebuke Queens, and had such weight
		among those proud turbulent Nobles, proud enough
		whatever else they were; and could maintain to the
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page380" name="page380"></a>380</span>end a kind of virtual Presidency and Sovereignty
		in that wild realm, he who was only &#8216;a subject born
		within the same:&#8217; this of itself will prove to us that he
		was found, close at hand, to be no mean acrid man; but
		at heart a healthful, strong, sagacious man. Such alone
		can bear rule in that kind. They blame him for pulling-down
		cathedrals, and so forth, as if he were a seditious
		rioting demagogue: precisely the reverse is seen to be
		the fact, in regard to cathedrals and the rest of it, if we
		examine! Knox wanted no pulling-down of stone
		edifices; he wanted leprosy and darkness to be thrown
		out of the lives of men. Tumult was not his element;
		it was the tragic feature of his life that he was forced
		to dwell so much in that. Every such man is the born
		enemy of Disorder; hates to be in it: but what then?
		Smooth Falsehood is not Order; it is the general sum-total
		of <em>Dis</em>order. Order is <em>Truth</em>,&#8212;each thing standing
		on the basis that belongs to it: Order and Falsehood
		cannot subsist together.</p>

		<p>Withal, unexpectedly enough, this Knox has a vein
		of drollery in him; which I like much, in combination
		with his other qualities. He has a true eye for the
		ridiculous. His <i>History</i>, with its rough earnestness, is
		curiously enlivened with this. When the two Prelates,
		entering Glasgow Cathedral, quarrel about precedence;
		march rapidly up, take to hustling one another, twitching
		one another&#8217;s rochets, and at last flourishing their
		crosiers like quarter-staves, it is a great sight for him
		everyway! Not mockery, scorn, bitterness alone;
		though there is enough of that too. But a true, loving,
		illuminating laugh mounts-up over the earnest visage;
		not a loud laugh; you would say, a laugh in the <em>eyes</em>
		most of all. An honest-hearted, brotherly man; brother
		to the high, brother also to the low; sincere in his sympathy
		with both. He has his pipe of Bourdeaux too, we
		find, in that old Edinburgh house of his; a cheery social
		man, with faces that loved him! They go far wrong
		who think this Knox was a gloomy, spasmodic, shrieking
		fanatic. Not at all: he is one of the solidest of
		men. Practical, cautious-hopeful, patient; a most
		shrewd, observing, quietly discerning man. In fact, he
		has very much the type of character we assign to the
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page381" name="page381"></a>381</span>Scotch at present: a certain sardonic taciturnity is in
		him; insight enough; and a stouter heart than he himself
		knows of. He has the power of holding his peace
		over many things which do not vitally concern him,&#8212;&#8220;They?
		what are they?&#8221; But the thing which does
		vitally concern him, that thing he will speak of; and
		in a tone the whole world shall be made to hear: all
		the more emphatic for his long silence.</p>

		<p>This Prophet of the Scotch is to me no hateful man!&#8212;He
		had a sore fight of an existence: wrestling with
		Popes and Principalities; in defeat, contention, life-long
		struggle; rowing as a galley-slave, wandering as
		an exile. A sore fight: but he won it. &#8220;Have you
		hope?&#8221; they asked him in his last moment, when he
		could no longer speak. He lifted his finger, &#8216;pointed
		upwards with his finger,&#8217; and so died. Honour to him!
		His works have not died. The letter of his work dies,
		as of all men&#8217;s; but the spirit of it never.</p>

		<p>One word more as to the letter of Knox&#8217;s work. The
		unforgivable offence in him is, that he wished to set-up
		Priests over the head of Kings. In other words he
		strove to make the Government of Scotland a <i>Theocracy</i>.
		This indeed is properly the sum of his offences, the
		essential sin; for which what pardon can there be?
		It is most true, he did, at bottom, consciously or unconsciously,
		mean a Theocracy, or Government of God. He
		did mean that Kings and Prime Ministers, and all
		manner of persons, in public or private, diplomatising
		or whatever else they might be doing, should walk according
		to the Gospel of Christ, and understand that
		this was their Law, supreme over all laws. He hoped
		once to see such a thing realised; and the Petition, <i>Thy
		Kingdom come</i>, no longer an empty word. He was
		sore grieved when he saw greedy worldly Barons clutch
		hold of the Church&#8217;s property; when he expostulated
		that it was not secular property, that it was spiritual
		property, and should be turned to <em>true</em> churchly uses,
		education, schools, worship;&#8212;and the Regent Murray
		had to answer, with a shrug of the shoulders, &#8220;It is
		a devout imagination!&#8221; This was Knox&#8217;s scheme of
		right and truth; this he zealously endeavoured after, to
		realise it. If we think this scheme of truth was too
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page382" name="page382"></a>382</span>narrow, was not true, we may rejoice that he could not
		realise it; that it remained after two centuries of effort,
		unrealisable, and is a &#8216;devout imagination&#8217; still. But
		how shall we blame <em>him</em> for struggling to realise it?
		Theocracy, Government of God, is precisely the thing
		to be struggled for! All Prophets, zealous Priests, are
		there for that purpose. Hildebrand wished a Theocracy;
		Cromwell wished it, fought for it; Mahomet
		attained it. Nay, is it not what all zealous men, whether
		called Priests, Prophets, or whatsoever else called, do
		essentially wish, and must wish? That right and truth,
		or God&#8217;s Law, reign supreme among men, this is the
		Heavenly Ideal (well named in Knox&#8217;s time, and namable
		in all times, a revealed &#8216;Will of God&#8217;) towards which
		the Reformer will insist that all be more and more
		approximated. All true Reformers, as I said, are by
		the nature of them Priests, and strive for a Theocracy.</p>

		<p>How far such Ideals can ever be introduced into
		Practice, and at what point our impatience with their
		non-introduction ought to begin, is always a question.
		I think we may say safely, Let them introduce themselves
		as far as they can contrive to do it! If they are
		the true faith of men, all men ought to be more or less
		impatient always where they are not found introduced.
		There will never be wanting Regent Murrays enough to
		shrug their shoulders, and say, &#8220;A devout imagination!&#8221;
		We will praise the Hero-priest, rather, who
		does what is in <em>him</em> to bring them in; and wears out,
		in toil, calumny, contradiction, a noble life, to make a
		God&#8217;s Kingdom of this Earth. The Earth will not
		become too godlike!</p>

	</div>
	<div id="lecturev" class="lecture">

		<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page383" name="page383"></a>383</span></p>

		<p class="lecture_head">LECTURE V</p>

		<h3 class="lecture_title">THE HERO AS A MAN OF LETTERS. JOHNSON, ROUSSEAU, BURNS.</h3>

		<p class="lecture_date">[Tuesday, 19th May 1840]</p>

		<p><span class="first_word">Hero-gods</span>, Prophets, Poets, Priests are forms of
		Heroism that belong to the old ages, make their appearance
		in the remotest times; some of them have ceased to
		be possible long since, and cannot any more show themselves
		in this world. The Hero as <i>Man of Letters</i>, again,
		of which class we are to speak today, is altogether a product
		of these new ages; and so long as the wondrous
		art of <i>Writing</i>, or of Ready-writing which we call <i>Printing</i>,
		subsists, he may be expected to continue, as one
		of the main forms of Heroism for all future ages. He
		is, in various respects, a very singular phenomenon.</p>

		<p>He is new, I say; he has hardly lasted above a century
		in the world yet. Never, till about a hundred years
		ago, was there seen any figure of a Great Soul living
		apart in that anomalous manner; endeavouring to speak-forth
		the inspiration that was in him by Printed Books,
		and find place and subsistence by what the world would
		please to give him for doing that. Much had been sold
		and bought, and left to make its own bargain in the
		marketplace; but the inspired wisdom of a Heroic Soul
		never till then, in that naked manner. He, with his
		copy-rights and copy-wrongs, in his squalid garret, in
		his rusty coat; ruling (for this is what he does), from
		his grave, after death, whole nations and generations
		who would, or would not, give him bread while living,&#8212;is
		a rather curious spectacle! Few shapes of Heroism
		can be more unexpected.</p>

		<p>Alas, the Hero from of old has had to cramp himself
		into strange shapes: the world knows not well at any
		time what to do with him, so foreign is his aspect in
		the world! It seemed absurd to us, that men, in their
		rude admiration, should take some wise great Odin for
		a god, and worship him as such, some wise great Mahomet
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page384" name="page384"></a>384</span>for one god-inspired, and religiously follow his Law
		for twelve centuries: but that a wise great Johnson, a
		Burns, a Rousseau, should be taken for some idle non-descript,
		extant in the world to amuse idleness, and
		have a few coins and applauses thrown in, that he might
		live thereby; <em>this</em> perhaps, as before hinted, will one
		day seem a still absurder phasis of things!&#8212;Meanwhile,
		since it is the spiritual always that determines the
		material, this same Man-of-Letters Hero must be regarded
		as our most important modern person. He,
		such as he may be, is the soul of all. What he teachers,
		the whole world will do and make. The world&#8217;s manner
		of dealing with him is the most significant feature of
		the world&#8217;s general position. Looking well at his life,
		we may get a glance, as deep as is readily possible for
		us, into the life of those singular centuries which have
		produced him, in which we ourselves live and work.</p>

		<p>There are genuine Men of Letters, and not genuine;
		as in every kind there is a genuine and a spurious. If
		<i>Hero</i> be taken to mean genuine, then I say the Hero
		as Man of Letters will be found discharging a function
		for us which is ever honourable, ever the highest; and
		was once well known to be the highest. He is uttering-forth,
		in such a way as he has, the inspired soul of him;
		all that a man, in any case, can do. I say <em>inspired</em>;
		for what we call &#8216;originality,&#8217; &#8216;sincerity,&#8217; &#8216;genius,&#8217; the
		heroic quality we have no good name for, signifies that.
		The Hero is he who lives in the inward sphere of things,
		in the True, Divine and Eternal, which exists always,
		unseen to most, under the Temporary, Trivial: his being
		is in that; he declares that abroad, by act or speech as
		it may be, in declaring himself abroad. His life, as
		we said before, is a piece of the everlasting heart of
		Nature herself: all men&#8217;s life is,&#8212;but the weak many
		know not the fact, and are untrue to it, in most times;
		the strong few are strong, heroic, perennial, because it
		cannot be hidden from them. The Man of Letters, like
		every Hero, is there to proclaim this in such sort as
		he can. Intrinsically it is the same function which the
		old generations named a man Prophet, Priest, Divinity
		for doing; which all manner of Heroes, by speech or
		by act, are sent into the world to do.</p>

		<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page385" name="page385"></a>385</span>Fichte the German Philosopher delivered, some forty
		years ago at Erlangen, a highly remarkable Course of
		Lectures on this subject: &#8216;<i>Ueber das Wesen des Gelehrten</i>,
		On the Nature of the Literary Man.&#8217; Fichte, in
		conformity with the Transcendental Philosophy, of
		which he was a distinguished teacher, declares first:
		That all things which we see or work with in this Earth,
		especially we ourselves and all persons, are as a kind
		of vesture or sensuous Appearance: that under all there
		lies, as the essence of them, what he calls the &#8216;Divine
		Idea of the World;&#8217; this is the Reality which &#8216;lies at
		the bottom of all Appearance.&#8217; To the mass of men
		no such Divine Idea is recognisable in the world; they
		live merely, says Fichte, among the superficialities,
		practicalities and shows of the world, not dreaming that
		there is anything divine under them. But the Man of
		Letters is sent hither specially that he may discern for
		himself, and make manifest to us, this same Divine
		Idea: in every new generation it will manifest itself
		in a new dialect; and he is there for the purpose of doing
		that. Such is Fichte&#8217;s phraseology; with which we need
		not quarrel. It is his way of naming what I here, by
		other words, am striving imperfectly to name; what
		there is at present no name for: The unspeakable
		Divine Significance, full of splendour, of wonder and
		terror, that lies in the being of every man, of every
		thing,&#8212;the Presence of the God who made every man
		and thing. Mahomet taught this in his dialect; Odin
		in his: it is the thing which all thinking hearts, in one
		dialect or another, are here to teach.</p>

		<p>Fichte calls the Man of Letters, therefore, a Prophet,
		or as he prefers to phrase it, a Priest, continually unfolding
		the Godlike to men: Men of Letters are a perpetual
		Priesthood, from age to age, teaching all men
		that a God is still present in their life; that all &#8216;Appearance,&#8217;
		whatsoever we see in the world, is but as a vesture
		for the &#8216;Divine Idea of the World,&#8217; for &#8216;that which lies
		at the bottom of Appearance.&#8217; In the true Literary Man
		there is thus ever, acknowledged or not by the world, a
		sacredness: he is the light of the world; the world&#8217;s
		Priest:&#8212;guiding it, like a sacred Pillar of Fire, in its
		dark pilgrimage through the waste of Time. Fichte discriminates
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page386" name="page386"></a>386</span>with sharp zeal the <em>true</em> Literary Man, what
		we here call the <i>Hero</i> as Man of Letters, from multitudes
		of false unheroic. Whoever lives not wholly in this
		Divine Idea, or living partially in it, struggles not, as
		for the one good, to live wholly in it,&#8212;he is, let him live
		where else he like, in what pomps and prosperities he
		like, no Literary Man; he is, says Fichte, a &#8216;Bungler,
		<i>Stümper</i>.&#8217; Or at best, if he belong to the prosaic provinces,
		he may be a &#8216;Hodman;&#8217; Fichte even calls him
		elsewhere a &#8216;Nonentity,&#8217; and has in short no mercy for
		him, no wish that <em>he</em> should continue happy among us!
		This is Fichte&#8217;s notion of the Man of Letters. It means,
		in its own form, precisely what we here mean.</p>

		<p>In this point of view, I consider that, for the last
		hundred years, by far the notablest of all Literary Men
		is Fichte&#8217;s countryman, Goethe. To that man too, in
		a strange way, there was given what we may call a
		life in the Divine Idea of the World; vision of the
		inward divine mystery: and strangely, out of his Books,
		the world rises imaged once more as godlike, the workmanship
		and temple of a God. Illuminated all, not in
		fierce impure fire-splendour as of Mahomet, but in mild
		celestial radiance;&#8212;really a Prophecy in these most
		unprophetic times; to my mind, by far the greatest,
		though one of the quietest, among all the great things
		that have come to pass in them. Our chosen specimen
		of the Hero as Literary Man would be this Goethe.
		And it were a very pleasant plan for me here to discourse
		of his heroism: for I consider him to be a true
		Hero; heroic in what he said and did, and perhaps still
		more in what he did not say and did not do; to me a
		noble spectacle: a great heroic ancient man, speaking
		and keeping silence as an ancient Hero, in the guise
		of a most modern, high-bred, high-cultivated Man of
		Letters! We have had no such spectacle; no man
		capable of affording such, for the last hundred-and-fifty
		years.</p>

		<p>But at present, such is the general state of knowledge
		about Goethe, it were worse than useless to attempt
		speaking of him in this case. Speak as I might, Goethe,
		to the great majority of you would remain problematic,
		vague; no impression but a false one could be realised.
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page387" name="page387"></a>387</span>Him we must leave to future times. Johnson, Burns,
		Rousseau, three great figures from a prior time, from a
		far inferior state of circumstances, will suit us better
		here. Three men of the Eighteenth Century; the conditions
		of their life far more resemble what those of ours
		still are in England, than what Goethe&#8217;s in Germany
		were. Alas, these men did not conquer like him; they
		fought bravely, and fell. They were not heroic bringers
		of the light, but heroic seekers of it. They lived under
		galling conditions; struggling as under mountains of
		impediment, and could not unfold themselves into clearness,
		or victorious interpretation of that &#8216;Divine Idea.&#8217;
		It is rather the <i>Tombs</i> of three Literary Heroes that I
		have to show you. There are the monumental heaps,
		under which three spiritual giants lie buried. Very
		mournful, but also great and full of interest for us. We
		will linger by them for a while.</p>

		<p>Complaint is often made, in these times, of what we
		call the disorganised condition of society: how ill many
		arranged forces of society fulfil their work; how many
		powerful forces are seen working in a wasteful, chaotic,
		altogether unarranged manner. It is too just a complaint,
		as we all know. But perhaps if we look at this
		of Books and the Writers of Books, we shall find here,
		as it were, the summary of all other disorganisation;&#8212;a
		sort of <em>heart</em>, from which, and to which, all other
		confusion circulates in the world! Considering what
		Book-writers do in the world, and what the world does
		with Book-writers, I should say, It is the most anomalous
		thing the world at present has to show.&#8212;We should
		get into a sea far beyond sounding, did we attempt to
		give account of this: but we must glance at it for the
		sake of our subject. The worst element in the life of
		these three Literary Heroes was, that they found their
		business and position such a chaos. On the beaten road
		there is tolerable travelling; but it is sore work, and
		many have to perish, fashioning a path through the
		impassable!</p>

		<p>Our pious Fathers, feeling well what importance lay
		in the speaking of man to men, founded churches, made
		endowments, regulations; everywhere in the civilised
		world there is a Pulpit, environed with all manner of
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page388" name="page388"></a>388</span>complex dignified appurtenances and furtherances, that
		therefrom a man with the tongue may, to best advantage,
		address his fellow-men. They felt that this was
		the most important thing; that without this there was
		no good thing. It is a right pious work, that of theirs;
		beautiful to behold! But now with the art of Writing,
		with the art of Printing, a total change has come over
		that business. The Writer of a Book, is not he a
		Preacher preaching not to this parish or that, on this
		day or that, but to all men in all times and places?
		Surely it is of the last importance that <em>he</em> do his work
		right, whoever do it wrong;&#8212;that the <em>eye</em> report not
		falsely, for then all the other members are astray!
		Well; how he may do his work, whether he do it right
		or wrong, or do it at all, is a point which no man in
		the world has taken the pains to think of. To a certain
		shopkeeper, trying to get some money for his books,
		if lucky, he is of some importance; to no other man
		of any. Whence he came, whither he is bound, by what
		ways he arrived, by what he might be furthered on his
		course, no one asks. He is an accident in society. He
		wanders like a wild Ishmaelite, in a world of which he is
		as the spiritual light, either the guidance or the misguidance!</p>

		<p>Certainly the art of writing is the most miraculous of
		all things man has devised. Odin&#8217;s <i>Runes</i> were the first
		form of the work of a Hero; <i>Books</i>, written words, are
		still miraculous <i>Runes</i>, of the latest form! In Books lies
		the <em>soul</em> of the whole Past Time; the articulate audible
		voice of the Past, when the body and material substance
		of it has altogether vanished like a dream. Mighty
		fleets and armies, harbours and arsenals, vast cities,
		high-domed, many-engined,&#8212;they are precious, great:
		but what do they become? Agamemnon, the many
		Agamemnons, Pericleses, and their Greece; all is gone
		now to some ruined fragments, dumb mournful wrecks
		and blocks: but the Books of Greece! There Greece,
		to every thinker, still very literally lives; can be called-up
		again into life. No magic <i>Rune</i> is stranger than a
		Book. All that Mankind has done, thought, gained or
		been: it is lying as in magic preservation in the pages
		of Books. They are the chosen possession of men.</p>

		<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page389" name="page389"></a>389</span>Do not Books still accomplish <em>miracles</em> as <i>Runes</i> were
		fabled to do? They persuade men. Not the wretchedest
		circulating-library novel, which foolish girls thumb
		and con in remote villages but will help to regulate
		the actual practical weddings and households of those
		foolish girls. So &#8216;Celia&#8217; felt, so &#8216;Clifford&#8217; acted: the
		foolish Theorem of Life, stamped into those young
		brains, comes out as a solid Practice one day. Consider
		whether any <i>Rune</i> in the wildest imagination of Mythologist
		ever did such wonders as, on the actual firm
		Earth, some Books have done! What built St Paul&#8217;s
		Cathedral? Look at the heart of the matter, it was that
		divine Hebrew <span class="special_emphasis">Book</span>,&#8212;the word partly of the man
		Moses, an outlaw tending his Midianitish herds, four
		thousand years ago, in the wildernesses of Sinai! It
		is the strangest of things, yet nothing is truer. With
		the art of Writing, of which Printing is a simple, an
		inevitable and comparatively insignificant corollary, the
		true reign of miracles for mankind commenced. It
		related, with a wondrous new contiguity and perpetual
		closeness, the Past and Distant with the Present in time
		and place; all times and all places with this our actual
		Here and Now. All things were altered for men; all
		modes of important work of men: teaching, preaching,
		governing, and all else.</p>

		<p>To look at Teaching, for instance. Universities are
		a notable, respectable product of the modern ages.
		Their existence too is modified, to the very basis of it,
		by the existence of Books. Universities arose while
		there were yet no Books procurable; while a man, for a
		single Book, had to give an estate of land. That, in
		those circumstances, when a man had some knowledge
		to communicate, he should do it by gathering the
		learners round him, face to face, was a necessity for him.
		If you wanted to know what Abelard knew, you must
		go and listen to Abelard. Thousands, as many as thirty-thousand,
		went to hear Abelard and that metaphysical
		theology of his. And now for any other teacher who
		had something of his own to teach, there was a great
		convenience opened: so many thousands eager to learn
		were already assembled yonder; of all places the best
		place for him was that. For any third teacher it was
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page390" name="page390"></a>390</span>better still; and grew ever the better, the more teachers
		there came. It only needed now that the King took
		notice of this new phenomenon; combined or agglomerated
		the various schools into one school; gave it edifices,
		privileges, encouragements, and named it <i>Universitas</i>,
		or School of all Sciences: the University of Paris, in its
		essential characters, was there. The model of all subsequent
		Universities; which down even to these days,
		for six centuries now, have gone on to found themselves.
		Such, I conceive, was the origin of Universities.</p>

		<p>It is clear, however, that with this simple circumstance,
		facility of getting Books, the whole conditions
		of the business from top to bottom were changed. Once
		invent Printing, you metamorphosed all Universities, or
		superseded them! The Teacher needed not now to
		gather men personally round him, that he might <em>speak</em>
		to them what he knew: print it in a Book, and all
		learners far and wide, for a trifle, had it each at his
		own fireside, much more effectually to learn it!&#8212;Doubtless
		there is still peculiar virtue in Speech; even writers
		of Books may still, in some circumstances, find it convenient
		to speak also,&#8212;witness our present meeting
		here! There <em>is</em>, one would say, and must ever remain
		while man has a tongue, a distinct province for Speech
		as well as for Writing and Printing. In regard to all
		things this must remain; to Universities among others.
		But the limits of the two have nowhere yet been pointed
		out, ascertained; much less put in practice: the University
		which would completely take-in that great new
		fact, of the existence of Printed Books, and stand on a
		clear footing for the Nineteenth Century as the Paris
		one did for the Thirteenth, has not yet come into existence.
		If we think of it, all that a University, or final
		highest School can do for us, is still but what the first
		School began doing,&#8212;teach us to <em>read</em>. We learn to
		<em>read</em>, in various languages, in various sciences; we
		learn the alphabet and letters of all manner of Books.
		But the place where we go to get knowledge, even
		theoretic knowledge, is the Books themselves! It depends
		on what we read, after all manner of Professors
		have done their best for us. The true University of
		these days is a Collection of Books.</p>

		<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page391" name="page391"></a>391</span>But to the Church itself, as I hinted already, all is
		changed, in its preaching, in its working, by the introduction
		of Books. The Church is the working recognised
		Union of our Priests or Prophets, of those who
		by wise teaching guide the souls of men. While there
		was no Writing, even while there was no Easy-writing
		or <i>Printing</i>, the preaching of the voice was the natural
		sole method of performing this. But now with Books!&#8212;He
		that can write a true Book, to persuade England,
		is not he the Bishop and Archbishop, the Primate of
		England and of All England? I many a time say, the
		writers of Newspapers, Pamphlets, Poems, Books, these
		<em>are</em> the real working effective Church of a modern
		country. Nay not only our preaching, but even our
		worship, is not it too accomplished by means of Printed
		Books? The noble sentiment which a gifted soul has
		clothed for us in melodious words, which brings melody
		into our hearts,&#8212;is not this essentially, if we will understand
		it, of the nature of worship? There are many, in
		all countries, who, in this confused time, have no other
		method of worship. He who, in any way, shows us
		better than we knew before that a lily of the fields is
		beautiful, does he not show it us as an effluence of the
		Fountain of all Beauty; as the <em>handwriting</em>, made
		visible there, of the great Maker of the Universe? He
		has sung for us, made us sing with him, a little verse of
		a sacred Psalm. Essentially so. How much more he
		who sings, who says, or in any way brings home to our
		heart the noble doings, feelings, darings and endurances
		of a brother man! He has verily touched our hearts
		as with a live coal <em>from the altar</em>. Perhaps there is no
		worship more authentic.</p>

		<p>Literature, so far as it is Literature, is an &#8216;apocalypse
		of Nature,&#8217; a revealing of the &#8216;open secret.&#8217; It may
		well enough be named, in Fichte&#8217;s style; a &#8216;continuous
		revelation&#8217; of the Godlike in the Terrestrial and Common.
		The Godlike does ever, in very truth, endure
		there; is brought out, now in this dialect, now in that,
		with various degrees of clearness: all true gifted Singers
		and Speakers are, consciously or unconsciously, doing
		so. The dark stormful indignation of a Byron, so wayward
		and perverse, may have touches of it; nay the
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page392" name="page392"></a>392</span>withered mockery of a French sceptic,&#8212;his mockery of
		the False, a love and worship of the True. How much
		more the sphere-harmony of a Shakspeare, of a Goethe;
		the cathedral-music of a Milton! They are something
		too, those humble genuine lark-notes of a Burns,&#8212;skylark,
		starting from the humble furrow, far overhead into
		the blue depths, and singing to us so genuinely there!
		For all true singing is of the nature of worship; as
		indeed all true <em>working</em> may be said to be,&#8212;whereof such
		<em>singing</em> is but the record, and fit melodious representation,
		to us. Fragments of a real &#8216;Church Liturgy&#8217;
		and &#8216;Body of Homilies,&#8217; strangely disguised from the
		common eye, are to be found weltering in that huge
		froth-ocean of Printed Speech we loosely call Literature!
		Books are our Church too.</p>

		<p>Or turning now to the Government of men. Witenagemote,
		old Parliament, was a great thing. The affairs
		of the nation were there deliberated and decided; what
		we were to <em>do</em> as a nation. But does not, though the
		name Parliament subsists, the parliamentary debate go
		on now, everywhere and at all times, in a far more comprehensive
		way, <em>out</em> of Parliament altogether? Burke
		said there were Three Estates in Parliament; but, in the
		Reporters&#8217; Gallery yonder, there sat a <i>Fourth Estate</i>
		more important far than they all. It is not a figure of
		speech, or a witty saying; it is a literal fact,&#8212;very
		momentous to us in these times. Literature is our
		Parliament too. Printing, which comes necessarily out
		of Writing, I say often, is equivalent to Democracy:
		invent Writing, Democracy is inevitable. Writing
		brings Printing; brings universal every-day extempore
		Printing, as we see at present. Whoever can speak,
		speaking now to the whole nation, becomes a power, a
		branch of government, with inalienable weight in law-making,
		in all acts of authority. It matters not what
		rank he has, what revenues or garnitures: the requisite
		thing is, that he have a tongue which others will listen
		to; this and nothing more is requisite. The nation is
		governed by all that has tongue in the nation: Democracy
		is virtually <em>there</em>. Add only, that whatsoever
		power exists will have itself, by and by, organised;
		working secretly under bandages, obscurations, obstructions,
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page393" name="page393"></a>393</span>it will never rest till it get to work free, unencumbered,
		visible to all. Democracy virtually extant will
		insist on becoming palpably extant.&#8212;</p>

		<p>On all sides, are we not driven to the conclusion that,
		of the things which man can do or make here below,
		by far the most momentous, wonderful and worthy are
		the things we call Books! Those poor bits of rag-paper
		with black ink on them;&#8212;from the Daily Newspaper to
		the sacred Hebrew <span class="special_emphasis">Book</span>, what have they not done,
		what are they not doing!&#8212;For indeed, whatever be the
		outward form of the thing (bits of paper, as we say,
		and black ink), is it not verily, at bottom, the highest
		act of man&#8217;s faculty that produces a Book? It is the
		<i>Thought</i> of man; the true thaumaturgic virtue; by
		which man works all things whatsoever. All that he
		does, and brings to pass, is the vesture of a Thought.
		This London City, with all its houses, palaces, steam-engines,
		cathedrals, and huge immeasurable traffic and
		tumult, what is it but a Thought, but millions of
		Thoughts made into One;&#8212;a huge immeasurable Spirit
		of a <span class="special_emphasis">Thought</span>, embodied in brick, in iron, smoke, dust,
		Palaces, Parliaments, Hackney Coaches, Katherine
		Docks, and the rest of it! Not a brick was made but
		some man had to <em>think</em> of the making of that brick.&#8212;The
		thing we called &#8216;bits of paper with traces of black
		ink,&#8217; is the <em>purest</em> embodiment a Thought of man can
		have. No wonder it is, in all ways, the activest and
		noblest.</p>

		<p>All this, of the importance and supreme importance
		of the Man of Letters in modern Society, and how the
		Press is to such a degree superseding the Pulpit, the
		Senate, the <i>Senatus Academicus</i> and much else, has been
		admitted for a good while; and recognised often enough,
		in late times, with a sort of sentimental triumph and
		wonderment. It seems to me, the Sentimental by and
		by will have to give place to the Practical. If Men of
		Letters <em>are</em> so incalculably influential, actually performing
		such work for us from age to age, and even from
		day to day, then I think we may conclude that Men of
		Letters will not always wander like unrecognised unregulated
		Ishmaelites among us! Whatsoever thing,
		as I said above, has virtual unnoticed power will castoff
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page394" name="page394"></a>394</span>its wrappages, bandages, and step-forth one day
		with palpably articulated, universally visible power.
		That one man wear the clothes, and take the wages, of
		a function which is done by quite another: there can
		be no profit in this; this is not right, it is wrong. And
		yet, alas, the <em>making</em> of it right,&#8212;what a business, for
		long times to come! Sure enough, this that we call
		Organisation of the Literary Guild is still a great way
		off, encumbered with all manner of complexities. If
		you asked me what were the best possible organisation
		for the Men of Letters in modern society; the arrangement
		of furtherance and regulation, grounded the most
		accurately on the actual facts of their position and of
		the world&#8217;s position,&#8212;I should beg to say that the problem
		far exceeded my faculty! It is not one man&#8217;s
		faculty; it is that of many successive men turned earnestly
		upon it, that will bring-out even an approximate
		solution. What the best arrangement were, none of us
		could say. But if you ask, Which is the worst? I
		answer: This which we now have, that Chaos should
		sit umpire in it; this is the worst. To the best, or any
		good one, there is yet a long way.</p>

		<p>One remark I must not omit, That royal or parliamentary
		grants of money are by no means the chief
		thing wanted! To give our Men of Letters stipends,
		endowments and all furtherance of cash, will do little
		towards the business. On the whole, one is weary of
		hearing about the omnipotence of money. I will say
		rather that, for a genuine man, it is no evil to be poor;
		that there ought to be Literary Men poor,&#8212;to show
		whether they are genuine or not! Mendicant Orders,
		bodies of good men doomed to <em>beg</em>, were instituted in
		the Christian Church; a most natural and even necessary
		development of the spirit of Christianity. It was
		itself founded on Poverty, on Sorrow, Contradiction,
		Crucifixion, every species of worldly Distress and Degradation.
		We may say, that he who has not known
		those things, and learned from them the priceless lessons
		they have to teach, has missed a good opportunity of
		schooling. To beg, and go barefoot, in coarse woollen
		cloak with a rope round your loins, and be despised
		of all the world, was no beautiful business;&#8212;nor an
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page395" name="page395"></a>395</span>honourable one in any eye, till the nobleness of those
		who did so had made it honoured of some!</p>

		<p>Begging is not in our course at the present time: but
		for the rest of it, who will say that a Johnson is not
		perhaps the better for being poor? It is needful for
		him, at all rates, to know that outward profit, that success
		of any kind is <em>not</em> the goal he has to aim at. Pride,
		vanity, ill-conditioned egoism of all sorts, are bred in his
		heart, as in every heart; need, above all, to be cast-out
		of his heart,&#8212;to be, with whatever pangs, torn-out of
		it, cast-forth from it, as a thing worthless. Byron, born
		rich and noble, made-out even less than Burns, poor
		and plebeian. Who knows but, in that same &#8216;best
		possible organisation&#8217; as yet far off, Poverty may still
		enter as an important element? What if our Men of
		Letters, Men setting-up to be Spiritual Heroes, were still
		<em>then</em>, as they now are, a kind of &#8216;involuntary monastic
		order;&#8217; bound still to this same ugly Poverty,&#8212;till they
		had tried what was in it too, till they had learned to
		make it too do for them! Money, in truth, can do much,
		but it cannot do all. We must know the province of it,
		and confine it; and even spurn it back, when it wishes
		to get farther.</p>

		<p>Besides, were the money-furtherances, the proper
		season for them, the fit assigner of them, all settled,&#8212;how
		is the Burns to be recognised that merits these?
		He must pass through the ordeal, and prove himself.
		<em>This</em> ordeal; this wild welter of a chaos which is called
		Literary Life; this too is a kind of ordeal! There is
		clear truth in the idea that a struggle from the lower
		classes of society, towards the upper regions and rewards
		of society, must ever continue. Strong men are
		born there, who ought to stand elsewhere than there.
		The manifold, inextricably complex, universal struggle
		of these constitutes, and must constitute, what is called
		the progress of society. For Men of Letters, as for
		all other sorts of men. How to regulate that struggle?
		There is the whole question. To leave it as it is, at the
		mercy of blind Chance; a whirl of distracted atoms, one
		cancelling the other; one of the thousand arriving
		saved, nine-hundred-and-ninety-nine lost by the way;
		your royal Johnson languishing inactive in garrets, or
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page396" name="page396"></a>396</span>harnessed to the yoke of Printer Cave; your Burns
		dying broken-hearted as a Gauger; your Rousseau
		driven into mad exasperation, kindling French Revolutions
		by his paradoxes: this, as we said, is clearly
		enough the <em>worst</em> regulation. The <em>best</em>, alas, is far
		from us!</p>

		<p>And yet there can be no doubt but it is coming;
		advancing on us, as yet hidden in the bosom of centuries:
		this is a prophecy one can risk. For so soon as men
		get to discern the importance of a thing, they do
		infallibly set about arranging it, facilitating, forwarding
		it; and rest not till, in some approximate degree, they
		have accomplished that. I say, of all Priesthoods,
		Aristocracies, Governing Classes at present extant in
		the world, there is no class comparable for importance
		to that Priesthood of the Writers of Books. This is a
		fact which he who runs may read,&#8212;and draw inferences
		from. &#8220;Literature will take care of itself,&#8221; answered
		Mr Pitt, when applied-to for some help for Burns.
		&#8220;Yes,&#8221; adds Mr Southey, &#8220;it will take care of itself;
		<em>and of you too</em>, if you do not look to it!&#8221;</p>

		<p>The result to individual Men of Letters is not the
		momentous one; they are but individuals, an infinitesimal
		fraction of the great body; they can struggle on, and
		live or else die, as they have been wont. But it deeply
		concerns the whole society, whether it will set its <em>light</em>
		on high places, to walk thereby; or trample it under
		foot, and scatter it in all ways of wild waste (not without
		conflagration), as heretofore! Light is the one thing
		wanted for the world. Put wisdom in the head of the
		world, the world will fight its battle victoriously, and be
		the best world man can make it. I call this anomaly of
		a disorganic Literary Class the heart of all other
		anomalies, at once product and parent; some good
		arrangement for that would be as the <i>punctum saliens</i>
		of a new vitality and just arrangement for all. Already,
		in some European countries, in France, in Prussia, one
		traces some beginnings of an arrangement for the
		Literary Class; indicating the gradual possibility of
		such. I believe that it is possible; that it will have to
		be possible.</p>

		<p>By far the most interesting fact I hear about the
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page397" name="page397"></a>397</span>Chinese is one on which we cannot arrive at clearness,
		but which excites endless curiosity even in the dim state:
		this namely, that they do attempt to make their Men of
		Letters their Governors! It would be rash to say, one
		understood how this was done, or with what degree of
		success it was done. All such things must be very
		unsuccessful; yet a small degree of success is precious;
		the very attempt how precious! There does seem to
		be, all over China, a more or less active search everywhere
		to discover the men of talent that grow up in
		the young generation. Schools there are for every one:
		a foolish sort of training, yet still a sort. The youths
		who distinguish themselves in the lower school are promoted
		into favourable stations in the higher, that they
		may still more distinguish themselves,&#8212;forward and
		forward: it appears to be out of these that the Official
		Persons, and incipient Governors, are taken. These
		are they whom they <em>try</em> first, whether they can govern
		or not. And surely with the best hope: for they are
		the men that have already shown intellect. Try them:
		they have not governed or administered as yet; perhaps
		they cannot; but there is no doubt they <em>have</em> some
		Understanding, without which no man can! Neither
		is Understanding a <em>tool</em>, as we are too apt to figure; &#8216;it
		is a <em>hand</em> which can handle any tool.&#8217; Try these men:
		they are of all others the best worth trying.&#8212;Surely
		there is no kind of government, constitution, revolution,
		social apparatus or arrangement, that I know of in this
		world, so promising to one&#8217;s scientific curiosity as this.
		The man of intellect at the top of affairs: this is the
		aim of all constitutions and revolutions, if they have any
		aim. For the man of true intellect, as I assert and
		believe always, is the noblehearted man withal, the true,
		just, humane and valiant man. Get <em>him</em> for governor,
		all is got; fail to get him, though you had Constitutions
		plentiful as blackberries, and a Parliament in every
		village, there is nothing yet got!&#8212;</p>

		<p>These things look strange, truly; and are not such
		as we commonly speculate upon. But we are fallen
		into strange times; these things will require to be
		speculated upon; to be rendered practicable, to be in
		some way put in practice. These and many others. On
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page398" name="page398"></a>398</span>all hands of us, there is the announcement, audible
		enough, that the old Empire of Routine has ended;
		that to say a thing has long been, is no reason for its
		continuing to be. The things which have been are
		fallen into decay, are fallen into incompetence; large
		masses of mankind, in every society of our Europe, are
		no longer capable of living at all by the things which
		have been. When millions of men can no longer by
		their utmost exertion gain food for themselves, and
		&#8216;the third man for thirty-six weeks each year is short
		of third-rate potatoes,&#8217; the things which have been
		must decidedly prepare to alter themselves!&#8212;I will now
		quit this of the organisation of Men of Letters.</p>

		<p class="post_thoughtbreak">Alas, the evil that pressed heaviest on those Literary
		Heroes of ours was not the want of organisation for
		Men of Letters, but a far deeper one; out of which,
		indeed, this and so many other evils for the Literary
		Man, and for all men, had, as from their fountain, taken
		rise. That our Hero as Man of Letters had to travel
		without highway, companionless, through an inorganic
		chaos,&#8212;and to leave his own life and faculty lying
		there, as a partial contribution towards <em>pushing</em> some
		highway through it: this, had not his faculty itself been
		so perverted and paralysed, he might have put up with,
		might have considered to be but the common lot of
		Heroes. His fatal misery was the <em>spiritual paralysis</em>,
		so we may name it, of the Age in which his life lay;
		whereby his life too, do what he might, was half-paralysed!
		The Eighteenth was a <i>Sceptical</i> Century;
		in which little word there is a whole Pandora&#8217;s Box of
		miseries. Scepticism means not intellectual Doubt
		alone, but moral Doubt; all sorts of <em>in</em>fidelity, insincerity,
		spiritual paralysis. Perhaps, in few centuries
		that one could specify since the world began, was a life
		of Heroism more difficult for a man. That was not an
		age of Faith,&#8212;an age of Heroes! The very possibility
		of Heroism had been, as it were, formally abnegated
		in the minds of all. Heroism was gone forever;
		Triviality, Formulism and Commonplace were come forever.
		The &#8216;age of miracles&#8217; had been, or perhaps
		had not been; but it was not any longer. An effete
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page399" name="page399"></a>399</span>world; wherein Wonder, Greatness, Godhood could not
		now dwell;&#8212;in one word, a godless world!</p>

		<p>How mean, dwarfish are their ways of thinking, in
		this time,&#8212;compared not with the Christian Shakspeares
		and Miltons, but with the old Pagan Skalds, with any
		species of believing men! The living <span class="special_emphasis">Tree</span> Igdrasil,
		with the melodious prophetic waving of its world-wide
		boughs, deep-rooted as Hela, has died-out into the
		clanking of a World-<span class="special_emphasis">Machine</span>. &#8216;Tree&#8217; and &#8216;Machine&#8217;:
		contrast these two things. I, for my share, declare the
		world to be no machine! I say that it does not go
		by wheel-and-pinion &#8216;motives,&#8217; self-interests, checks,
		balances; that there is something far other in it than
		the clank of spinning-jennies, and parliamentary
		majorities; and, on the whole, that it is not a machine
		at all!&#8212;The old Norse Heathen had a truer notion of
		God&#8217;s-world than these poor Machine-Sceptics: the old
		Heathen Norse were <em>sincere</em> men. But for these poor
		Sceptics there was no sincerity, no truth. Half-truth
		and hearsay was called truth. Truth, for most men,
		meant plausibility; to be measured by the number of
		votes you could get. They had lost any notion that
		sincerity was possible, or of what sincerity was. How
		many Plausibilities asking, with unaffected surprise and
		the air of offended virtue, What! am not I sincere?
		Spiritual Paralysis, I say, nothing left but a Mechanical
		life, was the characteristic of that century. For the
		common man, unless happily he stood <em>below</em> his century
		and belonged to another prior one, it was impossible
		to be a Believer, a Hero; he lay buried, unconscious,
		under these baleful influences. To the strongest man,
		only with infinite struggle and confusion was it possible
		to work himself half-loose; and lead as it were, in an
		enchanted, most tragical way, a spiritual death-in-life,
		and be a Half-Hero!</p>

		<p>Scepticism is the name we give to all this; as the
		chief symptom, as the chief origin of all this. Concerning
		which so much were to be said! It would take
		many Discourses, not a small fraction of one Discourse,
		to state what one feels about that Eighteenth Century
		and its ways. As indeed this, and the like of this,
		which we now call Scepticism, is precisely the black
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page400" name="page400"></a>400</span>malady and life-foe, against which all teaching and discoursing
		since man&#8217;s life began has directed itself:
		the battle of Belief against Unbelief is the never-ending
		battle! Neither is it in the way of crimination that one
		would wish to speak. Scepticism, for that century, we
		must consider as the decay of old ways of believing,
		the preparation afar off for new better and wider ways,&#8212;an
		inevitable thing. We will not blame men for it; we
		will lament their hard fate. We will understand that
		destruction of old <em>forms</em> is not destruction of everlasting
		<em>substances</em>; that Scepticism, as sorrowful and hateful
		as we see it, is not an end but a beginning.</p>

		<p>The other day speaking, without prior purpose that
		way, of Bentham&#8217;s theory of man and man&#8217;s life, I
		chanced to call it a more beggarly one than Mahomet&#8217;s.
		I am bound to say, now when it is once uttered, that
		such is my deliberate opinion. Not that one would
		mean offence against the man Jeremy Bentham, or those
		who respect and believe him. Bentham himself, and
		even the creed of Bentham, seems to me comparatively
		worthy of praise. It is a determinate <em>being</em> what all
		the world, in a cowardly, half-and-half manner, was
		tending to be. Let us have the crisis; we shall either
		have death or the cure. I call this gross, steam-engine
		Utilitarianism an approach towards new Faith. It
		was a laying down of cant; a saying to oneself: &#8220;Well
		then, this world is a dead iron machine, the god of it
		Gravitation and selfish Hunger; let us see what, by
		checking and balancing, and good adjustment of tooth
		and pinion, can be made of it!&#8221; Benthamism has something
		complete, manful, in such fearless committal of
		itself to what it finds true; you may call it Heroic,
		though a Heroism with its <em>eyes</em> put out! It is the
		culminating point, and fearless ultimatum, of what lay
		in the half-and-half state, pervading man&#8217;s whole existence
		in that Eighteenth Century. It seems to me, all
		deniers of Godhood, and all lip-believers of it, are
		bound to be Benthamites, if they have courage and
		honesty. Benthamism is an <em>eyeless</em> Heroism: the
		Human Species, like a hapless blinded Samson grinding
		in the Philistine Mill, clasps convulsively the pillars
		of its Mill; brings huge ruin down, but ultimately
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page401" name="page401"></a>401</span>deliverance withal. Of Bentham I meant to say no
		harm.</p>

		<p>But this I do say, and would wish all men to know
		and lay to heart, that he who discerns nothing but
		Mechanism in the Universe has in the fatalest way
		missed the secret of the Universe altogether. That all
		Godhood should vanish out of men&#8217;s conception of
		this Universe seems to me precisely the most brutal
		error,&#8212;I will not disparage Heathenism by calling it a
		Heathen error,&#8212;that men could fall into. It is not
		true; it is false at the very heart of it. A man who
		thinks so will think <em>wrong</em> about all things in the world;
		this original sin will vitiate all other conclusions he
		can form. One might call it the most lamentable of
		delusions,&#8212;not forgetting Witchcraft itself! Witchcraft
		worshipped at least a living Devil: but this worships
		a dead iron Devil; no God, not even a Devil!&#8212;Whatsoever
		is noble, divine, inspired, drops thereby out of
		life. There remains everywhere in life a despicable
		<i>caput-mortuum</i>; the mechanical hull, all soul fled out
		of it. How can a man act heroically? The &#8216;Doctrine
		of Motives&#8217; will teach him that it is, under more or
		less disguise, nothing but a wretched love of Pleasure,
		fear of Pain; that Hunger, of applause, of cash, of
		whatsoever victual it may be, is the ultimate fact of
		man&#8217;s life. Atheism, in brief;&#8212;which does indeed
		frightfully punish itself. The man, I say, is become
		spiritually a paralytic man; this god-like Universe a
		dead mechanical steam-engine, all working by motives,
		checks, balances, and I know not what; wherein, as
		in the detestable belly of some Phalaris&#8217;-Bull of his own
		contriving, he the poor Phalaris sits miserably dying!</p>

		<p>Belief I define to be the healthy act of a man&#8217;s mind.
		It is a mysterious indescribable process, that of getting
		to believe;&#8212;indescribable, as all vital acts are. We
		have our mind given us, not that it may cavil and argue,
		but that it may see into something, give us clear belief
		and understanding about something, whereon we are
		then to proceed to act. Doubt, truly, is not itself a
		crime. Certainly we do not rush out, clutch-up the first
		thing we find, and straightway believe that! All
		manner of doubt, inquiry, <span class="greek_text" title="skepsis">σκέψις</span> as it is named, about
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page402" name="page402"></a>402</span>all manner of objects, dwells in every reasonable mind.
		It is the mystic working of the mind, on the object it is
		<em>getting</em> to know and believe. Belief comes out of all
		this, above ground, like the tree from its hidden <em>roots</em>.
		But now if, even on common things, we require that
		a man keep his doubts <em>silent</em>, and not babble of them
		till they in some measure become affirmations or denials;
		how much more in regard to the highest things, impossible
		to speak of in words at all! That a man
		parade his doubt, and get to imagine that debating and
		logic (which means at best only the manner of <em>telling</em>
		us your thought, your belief or disbelief, about a thing)
		is the triumph and true work of what intellect he has:
		alas, this is as if you should <em>overturn</em> the tree, and
		instead of green boughs, leaves, and fruits, show us
		ugly taloned roots turned-up into the air,&#8212;and no
		growth, only death and misery going on!</p>

		<p>For the Scepticism, as I said, is not intellectual only;
		It is moral also; a chronic atrophy and disease of the
		whole soul. A man lives by believing something; not
		by debating and arguing about many things. A sad
		case for him when all that he can manage to believe is
		something he can button in his pocket, and with one or
		the other organ eat and digest! Lower than that he
		will not get. We call those ages in which he gets so
		low the mournfulest, sickest, and meanest of all ages.
		The world&#8217;s heart is palsied, sick: how can any limb of
		it be whole? Genuine Acting ceases in all departments
		of the world&#8217;s work; dextrous Similitude of Acting
		begins. The world&#8217;s wages are pocketed, the world&#8217;s
		work is not done. Heroes have gone out; quacks
		have come in. Accordingly, what Century, since the
		end of the Roman world, which also was a time of
		scepticism, simulacra and universal decadence, so
		abounds with Quacks as that Eighteenth! Consider
		them, with their tumid sentimental vapouring about
		virtue, benevolence,&#8212;the wretched Quack-squadron,
		Cagliostro at the head of them! Few men were without
		quackery; they had got to consider it a necessary
		ingredient and amalgam for truth. Chatham, our brave
		Chatham himself, comes down to the House, all wrapt
		and bandaged; he &#8216;has crawled out in great bodily
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page403" name="page403"></a>403</span>suffering,&#8217; and so on;&#8212;<em>forgets</em>, says Walpole, that he
		is acting the sick man; in the fire of debate, snatches
		his arm from the sling, and oratorically swings and
		brandishes it! Chatham himself lives the strangest
		mimetic life, half hero, half quack, all along. For
		indeed the world is full of dupes; and you have to gain
		the <em>world&#8217;s</em> suffrage! How the duties of the world will
		be done in that case, what quantities of error, which
		means failure, which means sorrow and misery, to some
		and to many, will gradually accumulate in all provinces
		of the world&#8217;s business, we need not compute.</p>

		<p>It seems to me, you lay your finger here on the
		heart of the world&#8217;s maladies, when you call it a
		Sceptical World. An insincere world; a godless untruth
		of a world! It is out of this, as I consider, that
		the whole tribe of social pestilences, French Revolutions,
		Chartisms, and what not, have derived their
		being, their chief necessity to be. This must alter.
		Till this alter, nothing can beneficially alter. My one
		hope of the world, my inexpugnable consolation in looking
		at the miseries of the world, is that this is altering.
		Here and there one does now find a man who knows, as
		of old, that this world is a Truth, and no Plausibility
		and Falsity; that he himself is alive, not dead or
		paralytic; and that the world is alive, instinct with
		Godhood, beautiful and awful, even as in the beginning
		of days! One man once knowing this, many men, all
		men, must by and by come to know it. It lies there
		clear, for whosoever will take the <em>spectacles</em> off his eyes
		and honestly look, to know! For such a man, the
		Unbelieving Century, with its unblessed Products, is
		already past: a new century is already come. The old
		unblessed Products and Performances, as solid as they
		look, are Phantasms, preparing speedily to vanish. To
		this and the other noisy, very great-looking Simulacrum
		with the whole world huzzahing at its heels, he can say,
		composedly stepping aside: Thou art not <em>true</em>; thou
		art not extant, only semblant; go thy way!&#8212;Yes,
		hollow Formulism, gross Benthamism, and other unheroic
		atheistic Insincerity is visibly and even rapidly
		declining. An unbelieving Eighteenth Century is but
		an exception,&#8212;such as now and then occurs. I prophesy
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page404" name="page404"></a>404</span>that the world will once more become <em>sincere</em>; a believing
		world: with <em>many</em> Heroes in it, a heroic world!
		It will then be a victorious world; never till then!</p>

		<p>Or indeed what of the world and its victories? Men
		speak too much about the world. Each one of us here,
		let the world go how it will, and be victorious or not
		victorious, has he not a Life of his own to lead? One
		Life; a little gleam of Time between two Eternities;
		no second chance to us forevermore! It were well for
		<em>us</em> to live not as fools and simulacra, but as wise and
		realities. The world&#8217;s being saved will not save us;
		nor the world&#8217;s being lost destroy us. We should look
		to ourselves: there is great merit here in the &#8216;duty of
		staying at home&#8217;! And, on the whole, to say truth, I
		never heard of &#8216;worlds&#8217; being &#8216;saved&#8217; in any other
		way. That mania of saving worlds is itself a piece of
		the Eighteenth Century with its windy sentimentalism.
		Let us not follow it too far. For the saving of the
		<em>world</em> I will trust confidently to the Maker of the world;
		and look a little to my own saving, which I am more
		competent to!&#8212;In brief, for the world&#8217;s sake, and for
		our own, we will rejoice greatly that Scepticism, Insincerity,
		Mechanical Atheism, with all their poison-dews,
		are going, and as good as gone.&#8212;</p>

		<p>Now it was under such conditions, in those times of
		Johnson, that our Men of Letters had to live. Times
		in which there was properly no truth in life. Old truths
		had fallen nigh dumb; the new lay yet hidden, not
		trying to speak. That Man&#8217;s Life here below was a
		Sincerity and Fact, and would forever continue such,
		no new intimation, in that dusk of the world, had yet
		dawned. No intimation; not even any French Revolution,&#8212;which
		we define to be a Truth once more, though
		a Truth clad in hellfire! How different was the Luther&#8217;s
		Pilgrimage, with its assured goal, from the Johnson&#8217;s,
		girt with mere traditions, suppositions, grown now incredible,
		unintelligible! Mahomet&#8217;s Formulas were of
		&#8216;wood waxed and oiled,&#8217; and could be <em>burnt</em> out of
		one&#8217;s way: poor Johnson&#8217;s were far more difficult to
		burn.&#8212;The strong man will ever find <em>work</em>, which
		means difficulty, pain, to the full measure of his strength.
		But to make-out a victory, in those circumstances of
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page405" name="page405"></a>405</span>our poor Hero as Man of Letters, was perhaps more
		difficult than in any. Not obstruction, disorganisation,
		Bookseller Osborne and Fourpence-halfpenny a day;
		not this alone; but the light of his own soul was taken
		from him. No landmark on the Earth; and, alas, what
		is that to having no loadstar in the Heaven! We need
		not wonder that none of those Three men rose to victory.
		That they fought truly is the highest praise. With a
		mournful sympathy we will contemplate, if not three
		living victorious Heroes, as I said, the Tombs of three
		fallen Heroes! They fell for us too; making a way
		for us. There are the mountains which they hurled
		abroad in their confused War of the Giants; under
		which, their strength and life spent, they now lie buried.</p>

		<p class="post_thoughtbreak">I have already written of these three Literary Heroes,
		expressly or incidentally; what I suppose is known to
		most of you; what need not be spoken or written a second
		time. They concern us here as the singular <i>Prophets</i>
		of that singular age; for such they virtually were; and
		the aspect they and their world exhibit, under this point
		of view, might lead us into reflections enough! I call
		them, all three, Genuine Men more or less; faithfully,
		for most part unconsciously, struggling to be genuine,
		and plant themselves on the everlasting truth of things.
		This to a degree that eminently distinguishes them
		from the poor artificial mass of their contemporaries;
		and renders them worthy to be considered as Speakers,
		in some measure, of the everlasting truth, as Prophets
		in that age of theirs. By Nature herself, a noble necessity
		was laid on them to be so. They were men of such
		magnitude that they could not live on unrealities,&#8212;clouds,
		froth and all inanity gave-way under them:
		there was no footing for them but on firm earth; no rest
		or regular motion for them, if they got not footing
		there. To a certain extent, they were Sons of Nature
		once more in an age of Artifice; once more, Original
		Men.</p>

		<p>As for Johnson, I have always considered him to
		be, by nature, one of our great English souls. A strong
		and noble man; so much left undeveloped in him to the
		last: in a kindlier element what might he not have been,&#8212;Poet,
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page406" name="page406"></a>406</span>Priest, sovereign Ruler! On the whole, a man
		must not complain of his &#8216;element,&#8217; of his &#8216;time,&#8217; or
		the like; it is thriftless work doing so. His time is
		bad: well then, he is there to make it better!&#8212;Johnson&#8217;s
		youth was poor, isolated, hopeless, very miserable.
		Indeed, it does not seem possible that, in any the favourablest
		outward circumstances, Johnson&#8217;s life could have
		been other than a painful one. The world might have
		had more of profitable <em>work</em> out of him, or less; but his
		<em>effort</em> against the world&#8217;s work could never have been
		a light one. Nature, in return for his nobleness, had
		said to him, Live in an element of diseased sorrow.
		Nay, perhaps the sorrow and the nobleness were intimately
		and even inseparably connected with each other.
		At all events, poor Johnson had to go about girt with
		continual hypochondria, physical and spiritual pain.
		Like a Hercules with the burning Nessus&#8217;-shirt on him,
		which shoots-in on him dull incurable misery: the
		Nessus&#8217;-shirt not to be stript-off, which is his own
		natural skin! In this manner <em>he</em> had to live. Figure
		him there, with his scrofulous diseases, with his great
		greedy heart, and unspeakable chaos of thoughts; stalking
		mournful as a stranger in this Earth; eagerly devouring
		what spiritual thing he could come at: school-languages
		and other merely grammatical stuff, if there
		were nothing better! The largest soul that was in all
		England; and provision made for it of &#8216;fourpence-halfpenny
		a day.&#8217; Yet a giant invincible soul; a true
		man&#8217;s. One remembers always that story of the shoes
		at Oxford: the rough, seamy-faced, rawboned College
		Servitor stalking about, in winter-season, with his shoes
		worn-out; how the charitable Gentleman Commoner
		secretly places a new pair at his door; and the rawboned
		Servitor, lifting them, looking at them near, with
		his dim eyes, with what thoughts,&#8212;pitches them out of
		window! Wet feet, mud, frost, hunger or what you
		will; but not beggary: we cannot stand beggary!
		Rude stubborn self-help here; a whole world of squalor,
		rudeness, confused misery and want, yet of nobleness
		and manfulness withal. It is a type of the man&#8217;s life,
		this pitching-away of the shoes. An original man;&#8212;not
		a secondhand, borrowing or begging man. Let us
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page407" name="page407"></a>407</span>stand on our own basis, at any rate! On such shoes
		as we ourselves can get. On frost and mud, if you
		will, but honestly on that;&#8212;on the reality and substance
		which Nature gives <em>us</em>, not on the semblance, on the
		thing she has given another than us!&#8212;</p>

		<p>And yet with all this rugged pride of manhood and
		self-help was there ever soul more tenderly affectionate,
		loyally submissive to what was really higher than he?
		Great souls are always loyally submissive, reverent to
		what is over them; only small mean souls are otherwise.
		I could not find a better proof of what I said the other
		day, That the sincere man was by nature the obedient
		man; that only in a World of Heroes was there loyal
		Obedience to the Heroic. The essence of <em>originality</em>
		is not that it be <em>new</em>: Johnson believed altogether in
		the old; he found the old opinions credible for him, fit
		for him; and in a right heroic manner lived under them.
		He is well worth study in regard to that. For we are
		to say that Johnson was far other than a mere man of
		words and formulas; he was a man of truths and facts.
		He stood by the old formulas; the happier was it for
		him that he could so stand: but in all formulas that
		<em>he</em> could stand by, there needed to be a most genuine
		substance. Very curious how, in that poor Paper-age,
		so barren, artificial, thick-quilted with Pedantries, Hearsays,
		the great Fact of this Universe glared in, forever
		wonderful, indubitable, unspeakable, divine-infernal,
		upon this man too! How he harmonised his Formulas
		with it, how he managed at all under such circumstances:
		that is a thing worth seeing. A thing &#8216;to be
		looked at with reverence, with pity, with awe.&#8217; That
		Church of St. Clement Danes, where Johnson still <em>worshipped</em>
		in the era of Voltaire, is to me a venerable
		place.</p>

		<p>It was in virtue of his <em>sincerity</em>, of his speaking still
		in some sort from the heart of Nature, though in the
		current artificial dialect, that Johnson was a Prophet.
		Are not all dialects &#8216;artificial&#8217;? Artificial things are not
		all false;&#8212;nay every true Product of Nature will infallibly
		<em>shape</em> itself; we may say all artificial things are,
		at the starting of them, <em>true</em>. What we call &#8216;Formulas&#8217;
		are not in their origin bad; they are indispensably good.
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page408" name="page408"></a>408</span>Formula is <em>method</em>, habitude; found wherever man is
		found. Formulas fashion themselves as Paths do, as
		beaten Highways, leading towards some sacred or high
		object, whither many men are bent. Consider it. One
		man, full of heartfelt earnest impulse, finds-out a way
		of doing somewhat,&#8212;were it of uttering his soul&#8217;s reverence
		for the Highest, were it but of fitly saluting his
		fellow-man. An inventor was needed to do that, a
		<em>poet</em>; he has articulated the dim-struggling thought
		that dwelt in his own and many hearts. This is his
		way of doing that; these are his footsteps, the beginning
		of a &#8216;Path.&#8217; And now see: the second man travels
		naturally in the footsteps of his foregoer, it is the
		<em>easiest</em> method. In the footsteps of his foregoer; yet
		with improvements, with changes where such seem
		good; at all events with enlargements, the Path ever
		<em>widening</em> itself as more travel it;&#8212;till at last there is
		a broad Highway whereon the whole world may travel
		and drive. While there remains a City or Shrine, or
		any Reality to drive to, at the farther end, the Highway
		shall be right welcome! When the City is gone, we
		will forsake the Highway. In this manner all Institutions,
		Practices, Regulated Things in the world have
		come into existence, and gone out of existence. Formulas
		all begin by being <em>full</em> of substance; you may call
		them the <em>skin</em>, the articulation into shape, into limbs
		and skin, of a substance that is already there: <em>they</em> had
		not been there otherwise. Idols, as we said, are not
		idolatrous till they become doubtful, empty for the worshipper&#8217;s
		heart. Much as we talk against Formulas, I
		hope no one of us is ignorant withal of the high significance
		of <em>true</em> Formulas; that they were, and will ever
		be, the indispensablest furniture of our habitation in this
		world.&#8212;&#8212;</p>

		<p>Mark, too, how little Johnson boasts of his &#8216;sincerity.&#8217;
		He has no suspicion of his being particularly sincere,&#8212;of
		his being particularly anything! A hard-struggling,
		weary-hearted man, or &#8216;scholar&#8217; as he calls himself,
		trying hard to get some honest livelihood in the world,
		not to starve, but to live&#8212;without stealing! A noble
		unconsciousness is in him. He does not &#8216;engrave <i>Truth</i>
		on his watch-seal;&#8217; no, but he stands by truth, speaks
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page409" name="page409"></a>409</span>by it, works and lives by it. Thus it ever is. Think
		of it once more. The man whom Nature has appointed
		to do great things is, first of all, furnished with that
		openness to Nature which renders him incapable of being
		<em>in</em>sincere! To his large, open, deep-feeling heart Nature
		is a Fact: all hearsay is hearsay; the unspeakable
		greatness of this Mystery of Life, let him acknowledge
		it or not, nay even though he seem to forget it or deny
		it, is ever present to <em>him</em>,&#8212;fearful and wonderful, on
		this hand and on that. He has a basis of sincerity;
		unrecognised, because never questioned or capable of
		question. Mirabeau, Mahomet, Cromwell, Napoleon:
		all the Great Men I ever heard-of have this as the
		primary material of them. Innumerable commonplace
		men are debating, are talking everywhere their commonplace
		doctrines, which they have learned by logic, by
		rote, at secondhand: to that kind of man all this is
		still nothing. He must have truth; truth which <em>he</em>
		feels to be true. How shall he stand otherwise? His
		whole soul, at all moments, in all ways, tells him
		that there is no standing. He is under the noble
		necessity of being true. Johnson&#8217;s way of thinking
		about this world is not mine, any more than Mahomet&#8217;s
		was: but I recognise the everlasting element of heart-<em>sincerity</em>
		in both; and see with pleasure how neither of
		them remains ineffectual. Neither of them is as <em>chaff</em>
		sown; in both of them is something which the seed-field
		will <em>grow</em>.</p>

		<p>Johnson was a Prophet to his people; preached a
		Gospel to them,&#8212;as all like him always do. The highest
		Gospel he preached we may describe as a kind of Moral
		Prudence: &#8216;in a world where much is to be done, and
		little is to be known,&#8217; see how you will <em>do</em> it! A thing
		well worth preaching. &#8216;A world where much is to be
		done, and little is to be known:&#8217; do not sink yourselves
		in boundless bottomless abysses of Doubt, of wretched
		god-forgetting Unbelief;&#8212;you were miserable then,
		powerless, mad: how could you <em>do</em> or work at all?
		Such Gospel Johnson preached and taught;&#8212;coupled,
		theoretically and practically, with this other great
		Gospel, &#8216;Clear your mind of Cant!&#8217; Have no trade
		with Cant: stand on the cold mud in the frosty
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page410" name="page410"></a>410</span>weather, but let it be in your own <em>real</em> torn shoes:
		&#8216;that will be better for you,&#8217; as Mahomet says! I call
		this, I call these two things <em>joined together</em>, a great
		Gospel, the greatest perhaps that was possible at that
		time.</p>

		<p>Johnson&#8217;s Writings, which once had such currency
		and celebrity, are now, as it were, disowned by the
		young generation. It is not wonderful; Johnson&#8217;s
		opinions are fast becoming obsolete: but his style of
		thinking and of living, we may hope, will never become
		obsolete. I find in Johnson&#8217;s Books the indisputablest
		traces of a great intellect and great heart:&#8212;ever welcome,
		under what obstructions and perversions soever.
		They are <em>sincere</em> words, those of his; he means things
		by them. A wondrous buckram style,&#8212;the best he
		could get to then; a measured grandiloquence, stepping
		or rather stalking along in a very solemn way, grown
		obsolete now; sometimes a tumid <em>size</em> of phraseology
		not in proportion to the contents of it: all this you will
		put-up with. For the phraseology, tumid or not, has
		always <em>something within it</em>. So many beautiful styles
		and books, with <em>nothing</em> in them;&#8212;a man is a <em>male</em>factor
		to the world who writes such! <em>They</em> are the
		avoidable kind!&#8212;Had Johnson left nothing but his
		<i>Dictionary</i>, one might have traced there a great intellect,
		a genuine man. Looking to its clearness of definition,
		its general solidity, honesty, insight, and successful
		method, it may be called the best of all Dictionaries.
		There is in it a kind of architectural nobleness; it stands
		there like a great solid square-built edifice, finished,
		symmetrically complete: you judge that a true Builder
		did it.</p>

		<p>One word, in spite of our haste, must be granted to
		poor Bozzy. He passes for a mean, inflated, gluttonous
		creature; and was so in many senses. Yet the fact of
		his reverence for Johnson will ever remain noteworthy.
		The foolish conceited Scotch Laird, the most conceited
		man of his time, approaching in such awestruck attitude
		the great dusty irascible Pedagogue in his mean garret
		there: it is a genuine reverence for Excellence; a <em>worship</em>
		for Heroes, at a time when neither Heroes nor
		worship were surmised to exist. Heroes, it would seem
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page411" name="page411"></a>411</span>exist always, and a certain worship of them! We will
		also take the liberty to deny altogether that of the witty
		Frenchman, that no man is a Hero to his valet-de-chambre.
		Or if so, it is not the Hero&#8217;s blame, but the
		Valet&#8217;s: that his soul, namely, is a mean <em>valet</em>-soul!
		He expects his Hero to advance in royal stage-trappings,
		with measured step, trains borne behind him, trumpets
		sounding before him. It should stand rather, No man
		can be a <i>Grand-Monarque</i> to his valet-de-chambre. Strip
		your Louis Quatorze of his king-gear, and there <em>is</em> left
		nothing but a poor forked radish with a head fantastically
		carved;&#8212;admirable to no valet. The Valet does
		not know a Hero when he sees him! Alas, no: it
		requires a kind of <i>Hero</i> to do that;&#8212;and one of the
		world&#8217;s wants, in <em>this</em> as in other senses, is for the most
		part want of such.</p>

		<p>On the whole, shall we not say, that Boswell&#8217;s admiration
		was well bestowed; that he could have found no
		soul in all England so worthy of bending down before?
		Shall we not say, of this great mournful Johnson too, that
		he guided his difficult confused existence wisely; led it
		<em>well</em>, like a right-valiant man? That waste chaos of
		Authorship by trade; that waste chaos of Scepticism
		in religion and politics, in life-theory and life-practice;
		in his poverty, in his dust and dimness, with the sick
		body and the rusty coat: he made it do for him, like
		a brave man. Not wholly without a loadstar in the
		Eternal; he had still a loadstar, as the brave all need
		to have: with his eye set on that, he would change
		his course for nothing in these confused vortices of the
		lower sea of Time. &#8216;To the Spirit of Lies, bearing
		death and hunger, he would in no wise strike his flag.&#8217;
		Brave old Samuel: <i>ultimus Romanorum</i>!</p>

		<p class="post_thoughtbreak">Of Rousseau and his Heroism I cannot say so much.
		He is not what I call a strong man. A morbid, excitable,
		spasmodic man; at best, intense rather than strong.
		He had not &#8216;the talent of Silence,&#8217; an invaluable talent;
		which few Frenchmen, or indeed men of any sort in these
		times, excel in! The suffering man ought really &#8216;to
		consume his own smoke;&#8217; there is no good in emitting
		<em>smoke</em> till you have made it into <em>fire</em>,&#8212;which, in the
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page412" name="page412"></a>412</span>metaphorical sense too, all smoke is capable of becoming!
		Rousseau has not depth or width, not calm force
		for difficulty; the first characteristic of true greatness.
		A fundamental mistake to call vehemence and rigidity
		strength! A man is not strong who takes convulsion-fits;
		though six men cannot hold him then. He that
		can walk under the heaviest weight without staggering,
		he is the strong man. We need forever, especially in
		these loud-shrieking days, to remind ourselves of that.
		A man who cannot <em>hold his peace</em>, till the time come for
		speaking and acting, is no right man.</p>

		<p>Poor Rousseau&#8217;s face is to me expressive of him. A
		high but narrow contracted intensity in it: bony brows;
		deep, straight-set eyes, in which there is something bewildered-looking,&#8212;bewildered,
		peering with lynx-eagerness.
		A face full of misery, even ignoble misery, and
		also of the antagonism against that; something mean,
		plebeian there, redeemed only by <em>intensity</em>: the face of
		what is called a Fanatic,&#8212;a sadly <em>contracted</em> Hero! We
		name him here because, with all his drawbacks, and
		they are many, he has the first and chief characteristic of
		a Hero: he is heartily <em>in earnest</em>. In earnest, if ever
		man was; as none of these French Philosophes were.
		Nay, one would say, of an earnestness too great for his
		otherwise sensitive, rather feeble nature; and which
		indeed in the end drove him into the strangest incoherences,
		almost delirations. There had come, at last, to
		be a kind of madness in him: his Ideas <em>possessed</em> him
		like demons; hurried him so about, drove him over
		steep places!&#8212;</p>

		<p>The fault and misery of Rousseau was what we easily
		name by a single word <i>Egoism</i>; which is indeed the
		source and summary of all faults and miseries whatsoever.
		He had not perfected himself into victory over
		mere Desire; a mean hunger, in many sorts, was still
		the motive principle of him. I am afraid he was a very
		vain man; hungry for the praises of men. You remember
		Genlis&#8217;s experience of him. She took Jean Jacques
		to the Theatre; he bargaining for a strict incognito,&#8212;&#8221;<em>He</em>
		would not be seen there for the world!&#8221; The
		curtain did happen nevertheless to be drawn aside: the
		Pit recognised Jean Jacques, but took no great notice
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page413" name="page413"></a>413</span>of him! He expressed the bitterest indignation;
		gloomed all evening, spake no other than surly words.
		The glib Countess remained entirely convinced that his
		anger was not at being seen, but at not being applauded
		when seen. How the whole nature of the man is
		poisoned; nothing but suspicion, self-isolation, fierce
		moody ways! He could not live with anybody. A man
		of some rank from the country, who visited him often,
		and used to sit with him, expressing all reverence and
		affection for him, comes one day, finds Jean Jacques full
		of the sourest unintelligible humour. &#8220;Monsieur,&#8221; said
		Jean Jacques, with flaming eyes, &#8220;I know why you
		come here. You come to see what a poor life I lead;
		how little is in my poor pot that is boiling there. Well,
		look into the pot! There is half a pound of meat, one
		carrot and three onions; that is all: go and tell the
		whole world that, if you like, Monsieur!&#8221;&#8212;A man of
		this sort was far gone. The whole world got itself
		supplied with anecdotes for light laughter, for a certain
		theatrical interest, from these perversions and contortions
		of poor Jean Jacques. Alas, to him they were not
		laughing or theatrical; too real to him! The contortions
		of a dying gladiator: the crowded amphitheatre
		looks-on with entertainment; but the gladiator is in
		agonies and dying.</p>

		<p>And yet this Rousseau, as we say, with his passionate
		appeals to Mothers, with his <i>Contrat-social</i>, with his
		celebrations of Nature, even of savage life in Nature,
		did once more touch upon Reality, struggle towards
		Reality; was doing the function of a Prophet to his
		Time. As <em>he</em> could, and as the Time could! Strangely
		through all that defacement, degradation and almost
		madness, there is in the inmost heart of poor Rousseau
		a spark of real heavenly fire. Once more, out of the
		element of that withered mocking Philosophism, Scepticism
		and Persiflage, there has arisen in that man the
		ineradicable feeling and knowledge that this Life of ours
		is <em>true</em>; not a Scepticism, Theorem, or Persiflage, but
		a Fact, an awful Reality. Nature had made that revelation
		to him; had ordered him to speak it out. He got
		it spoken out; if not well and clearly, then ill and
		dimly,&#8212;as clearly as he could. Nay what are all errors
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page414" name="page414"></a>414</span>and perversities of his, even those stealings of ribbons
		aimless confused miseries and vagabondisms, if we will
		interpret them kindly, but the blinkard dazzlements and
		staggerings to and fro of a man sent on an errand he
		is too weak for, by a path he cannot yet find? Men are
		led by strange ways. One should have tolerance for a
		man, hope of him; leave him to try yet what he will
		do. While life lasts, hope lasts for every man.</p>

		<p>Of Rousseau&#8217;s literary talents, greatly celebrated still
		among his countrymen, I do not say much. His Books,
		like himself, are what I call unhealthy; not the good sort
		of Books. There is a sensuality in Rousseau. Combined
		with such an intellectual gift as his, it makes pictures
		of a certain gorgeous attractiveness: but they are not
		genuinely poetical. Not white sunlight: something
		<em>operatic</em>; a kind of rosepink, artificial bedizenment. It
		is frequent, or rather it is universal, among the French
		since his time. Madame de Staël has something of it;
		St. Pierre; and down onwards to the present astonishing
		convulsionary &#8216;Literature of Desperation,&#8217; it is
		everywhere abundant. That same <em>rosepink</em> is not the
		right hue. Look at a Shakspeare, at a Goethe, even
		at a Walter Scott! He who has once seen into this,
		has seen the difference of the True from the Sham-True,
		and will discriminate them ever afterwards.</p>

		<p>We had to observe in Johnson how much good a Prophet,
		under all disadvantages and disorganisations, can
		accomplish for the world. In Rousseau we are called
		to look rather at the fearful amount of evil which, under
		such disorganisation, may accompany the good. Historically
		it is a most pregnant spectacle, that of Rousseau.
		Banished into Paris garrets, in the gloomy company
		of his own Thoughts and Necessities there; driven
		from post to pillar; fretted, exasperated till the heart
		of him went mad, he had grown to feel deeply that the
		world was not his friend nor the world&#8217;s law. It was
		expedient, if anyway possible, that such a man should
		<em>not</em> have been set in flat hostility with the world. He
		could be cooped into garrets, laughed at as a maniac,
		left to starve like a wild beast in his cage;&#8212;but he could
		not be hindered from setting the world on fire. The
		French Revolution found its Evangelist in Rousseau.
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page415" name="page415"></a>415</span>His semi-delirious speculations on the miseries of
		civilised life, the preferability of the savage to the
		civilised, and suchlike, helped well to produce a whole
		delirium in France generally. True, you may well ask,
		What could the world, the governors of the world, do
		with such a man? Difficult to say what the governors
		of the world could do with him! What he could do
		with them is unhappily clear enough,&#8212;<i>guillotine</i> a great
		many of them! Enough now of Rousseau.</p>

		<p class="post_thoughtbreak">It was a curious phenomenon, in the withered, unbelieving,
		secondhand Eighteenth Century, that of a Hero
		starting up, among the artificial pasteboard figures and
		productions, in the guise of a Robert Burns. Like a
		little well in the rocky desert places,&#8212;like a sudden
		splendour of Heaven in the artificial Vauxhall! People
		knew not what to make of it. They took it for a piece
		of the Vauxhall fire-work; alas, it <em>let</em> itself be so taken,
		though struggling half-blindly, as in bitterness of death,
		against that! Perhaps no man had such a false reception
		from his fellow-men. Once more a very wasteful
		life-drama was enacted under the sun.</p>

		<p>The tragedy of Burns&#8217;s life is known to all of you.
		Surely we may say, if discrepancy between place held
		and place merited constitute perverseness of lot for a
		man, no lot could be more perverse than Burns&#8217;s.
		Among those secondhand acting-figures, <em>mimes</em> for most
		part, of the Eighteenth Century, once more a giant
		Original man; one of those men who reach down to the
		perennial Deeps, who take rank with the Heroic among
		men: and he was born in a poor Ayrshire hut. The
		largest soul of all the British lands came among us in
		the shape of a hard-handed Scottish Peasant.</p>

		<p>His Father, a poor toiling man, tried various things;
		did not succeed in any; was involved in continual difficulties.
		The Steward, Factor as the Scotch call him,
		used to send letters and threatenings, Burns says, &#8216;which
		threw us all into tears.&#8217; The brave, hard-toiling, hard-suffering
		Father, his brave heroine of a wife; and those
		children, of whom Robert was one! In this Earth, so
		wide otherwise, no shelter for <em>them</em>. The letters &#8216;threw
		us all into tears:&#8217; figure it. The brave Father, I say
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page416" name="page416"></a>416</span>always;&#8212;a <em>silent</em> Hero and Poet; without whom the
		son had never been a speaking one! Burns&#8217;s Schoolmaster
		came afterwards to London, learnt what good
		society was; but declares that in no meeting of men
		did he ever enjoy better discourse than at the hearth of
		this peasant. And his poor &#8216;seven acres of nursery-ground,&#8217;&#8212;not
		that, nor the miserable patch of clay-farm,
		nor anything he tried to get a living by, would
		prosper with him; he had a sore unequal battle all his
		days. But he stood to it valiantly; a wise, faithful,
		unconquerable man;&#8212;swallowing-down how many sore
		sufferings daily into silence; fighting like an unseen
		Hero,&#8212;nobody publishing newspaper paragraphs about
		his nobleness; voting pieces of plate to him! However,
		he was not lost: nothing is lost. Robert is there;
		the outcome of him,&#8212;and indeed of many generations
		of such as him.</p>

		<p>This Burns appears under every disadvantage: uninstructed,
		poor, born only to hard manual toil; and
		writing, when it came to that, in a rustic special dialect,
		known only to a small province of the country he lived
		in. Had he written, even what he did write, in the
		general language of England, I doubt not he had
		already become universally recognised as being, or
		capable to be, one of our greatest men. That he should
		have tempted so many to penetrate through the rough
		husk of that dialect of his, is proof that there lay something
		far from common within it. He has gained a
		certain recognition, and is continuing to do so over all
		quarters of our wide Saxon world: wheresoever a
		Saxon dialect is spoken, it begins to be understood, by
		personal inspection of this and the other, that one of
		the most considerable Saxon men of the Eighteenth
		century was an Ayrshire Peasant named Robert Burns.
		Yes, I will say, here too was a piece of the right Saxon
		stuff: strong as the Harz-rock, rooted in the depths of
		the world;&#8212;rock, yet with wells of living softness in
		it! A wild impetuous whirlwind of passion and faculty
		slumbered quiet there; such heavenly <em>melody</em> dwelling
		in the heart of it. A noble rough genuineness; homely,
		rustic, honest; true simplicity of strength: with its
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page417" name="page417"></a>417</span>lightning-fire, with its soft dewy pity;&#8212;like the old
		Norse Thor, the Peasant-god!&#8212;</p>

		<p>Burns&#8217;s Brother Gilbert, a man of much sense and
		worth, has told me that Robert, in his young days, in
		spite of their hardship, was usually the gayest of
		speech; a fellow of infinite frolic, laughter, sense and
		heart; far pleasanter to hear there, stript cutting peats
		in the bog, or suchlike, than he ever afterwards knew
		him. I can well believe it. This basis of mirth (&#8216;<i>fond
		gaillard</i>,&#8217; as old Marquis Mirabeau calls it), a primal-element
		of sunshine and joyfulness, coupled with his
		other deep and earnest qualities, is one of the most
		attractive characteristics of Burns. A large fund of
		Hope dwells in him; spite of his tragical history, he
		is not a mourning man. He shakes his sorrows gallantly
		aside; bounds forth victorious over them. It is as
		the lion shaking &#8216;dew-drops from his mane;&#8217; as the
		swift-bounding horse, that <em>laughs</em> at the shaking of the
		spear.&#8212;But indeed, Hope, Mirth, of the sort like
		Burns&#8217;s, are they not the outcome properly of warm
		generous affection,&#8212;such as is the beginning of all to
		every man?</p>

		<p>You would think it strange if I called Burns the most
		gifted British soul we had in all that century of his:
		and yet I believe the day is coming when there will be
		little danger in saying so. His writings, all that he
		<em>did</em> under such obstructions, are only a poor fragment
		of him. Professor Stewart remarked very justly, what
		indeed is true of all Poets good for much, that his
		poetry was not any particular faculty; but the general
		result of a naturally vigorous original mind expressing
		itself in that way. Burns&#8217;s gifts, expressed in conversation,
		are the theme of all that ever heard him. All
		kinds of gifts: from the gracefulest utterances of courtesy,
		to the highest fire of passionate speech; loud floods of
		mirth, soft wailings of affection, laconic emphasis, clear
		piercing insight; all was in him. Witty duchesses celebrate
		him as a man whose speech &#8216;led them off their feet.&#8217;
		This is beautiful: but still more beautiful that which
		Mr. Lockhart has recorded, which I have more than
		once alluded to, How the waiters and ostlers at inns
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page418" name="page418"></a>418</span>would get out of bed, and come crowding to hear this
		man speak! Waiters and ostlers:&#8212;they too were men,
		and here was a man! I have heard much about his
		speech; but one of the best things I ever heard of it
		was, last year, from a venerable gentleman long familiar
		with him. That it was speech distinguished by always
		<em>having something in it</em>. &#8220;He spoke rather little than
		much,&#8221; this old man told me; &#8220;sat rather silent in
		those early days, as in the company of persons above
		him; and always when he did speak, it was to throw
		new light on the matter.&#8221; I know not why any one
		should ever speak otherwise!&#8212;But if we look at his
		general force of soul, his healthy <em>robustness</em> everyway,
		the rugged down-rightness, penetration, generous
		valour and manfulness that was in him,&#8212;where shall
		we readily find a better-gifted man?</p>

		<p>Among the great men of the Eighteenth Century, I
		sometimes feel as if Burns might be found to resemble
		Mirabeau more than any other. They differ widely in
		vesture; yet look at them intrinsically. There is the
		same burly thick-necked strength of body as of soul;&#8212;built,
		in both cases, on what the old Marquis calls a
		<i>fond gaillard</i>. By nature, by course of breeding, indeed
		by nation, Mirabeau has much more of bluster; a noisy,
		forward, unresting man. But the characteristic of
		Mirabeau too is veracity and sense, power of true
		<em>insight</em>, superiority of vision. The thing that he says
		is worth remembering. It is a flash of insight into
		some object or other: so do both these men speak.
		The same raging passions; capable too in both of manifesting
		themselves as the tenderest noble affections.
		Wit, wild laughter, energy, directness, sincerity: these
		were in both. The types of the two men are not dissimilar.
		Burns too could have governed, debated in
		National Assemblies; politicised, as few could. Alas,
		the courage which had to exhibit itself in capture of
		smuggling schooners in the Solway Frith; in keeping
		<em>silence</em> over so much, where no good speech, but only
		inarticulate rage was possible: this might have bellowed
		forth Ushers de Brézé and the like; and made itself
		visible to all men, in managing of kingdoms, in ruling
		of great ever-memorable epochs! But they said to
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page419" name="page419"></a>419</span>him reprovingly, his Official Superiors said, and wrote:
		&#8216;You are to work, not think.&#8217; Of your <em>thinking</em>-faculty,
		the greatest in this land, we have no need; you
		are to gauge beer there; for that only are <em>you</em> wanted.
		Very notable;&#8212;and worth mentioning, though we know
		what is to be said and answered! As if Thought,
		Power of Thinking, were not, at all times, in all places
		and situations of the world, precisely the thing that
		<em>was</em> wanted. The fatal man, is he not always the
		<em>un</em>thinking man, the man who cannot think and <em>see</em>;
		but only grope, and hallucinate, and <em>mis</em>see the nature
		of the thing he works with? He missees it, mis<em>takes</em>
		it as we say; takes it for one thing, and it <em>is</em> another
		thing,&#8212;and leaves him standing like a Futility there!
		He is the fatal man; unutterably fatal, put in the high
		places of men.&#8212;&#8220;Why complain of this?&#8221; say some:
		&#8220;Strength is mournfully denied its arena; that was
		true from of old.&#8221; Doubtless; and the worse for the
		<em>arena</em>, answer I! <em>Complaining</em> profits little; stating
		of the truth may profit. That a Europe, with its
		French Revolution just breaking out, finds no need of
		a Burns except for gauging beer,&#8212;is a thing I, for
		one, cannot <em>rejoice</em> at!&#8212;</p>

		<p>Once more we have to say here, that the chief quality
		of Burns is the <em>sincerity</em> of him. So in his Poetry, so
		in his Life. The Song he sings is not of fantasticalities;
		it is of a thing felt, really there; the prime merit
		of this, as of all in him, and of his Life generally, is
		truth. The Life of Burns is what we may call a great
		tragic sincerity. A sort of savage sincerity,&#8212;not cruel,
		far from that; but wild, wrestling naked with the truth
		of things. In that sense, there is something of the
		savage in all great men.</p>

		<p>Hero-worship,&#8212;Odin, Burns? Well; these Men of
		Letters too were not without a kind of Hero-worship:
		but what a strange condition has that got into now!
		The waiters and ostlers of Scotch inns, prying about
		the door, eager to catch any word that fell from Burns,
		were doing unconscious reverence to the Heroic. Johnson
		had his Boswell for worshipper. Rousseau had
		worshippers enough; princes calling on him in his mean
		garret; the great, the beautiful doing reverence to the
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page420" name="page420"></a>420</span>poor moonstruck man. For himself a most portentous
		contradiction; the two ends of his life not to be brought
		into harmony. He sits at the tables of grandees; and
		has to copy music for his own living. He cannot even
		get his music copied. &#8220;By dint of dining out,&#8221; says
		he, &#8220;I run the risk of dying by starvation at home.&#8221;
		For his worshippers too a most questionable thing! If
		doing Hero-worship well or badly be the test of vital
		wellbeing or illbeing to a generation, can we say that
		<em>these</em> generations are very first-rate?&#8212;And yet our
		heroic Men of Letters do teach, govern, are kings,
		priests, or what you like to call them; intrinsically
		there is no preventing it by any means whatever. The
		world <em>has</em> to obey him who thinks and sees in the
		world. The world can alter the manner of that; can
		either have it as blessed continuous summer sunshine,
		or as unblessed black thunder and tornado,&#8212;with unspeakable
		difference of profit for the world! The
		manner of it is very alterable; the matter and fact of
		it is not alterable by any power under the sky. Light;
		or, failing that, lightning: the world can take its
		choice. Not whether we call an Odin god, prophet,
		priest, or what we call him; but whether we believe
		the word he tells us: there it all lies. If it be a true
		word, we shall have to believe it; believing it, we shall
		have to do it. What <em>name</em> or welcome we give him or
		it, is a point that concerns ourselves mainly. <em>It</em>, the
		new Truth, new deeper revealing of the Secret of this
		Universe, is verily of the nature of a message from on
		high; and must and will have itself obeyed.&#8212;</p>

		<p>My last remark is on that notablest phasis of Burns&#8217;s
		history,&#8212;his visit to Edinburgh. Often it seems to me
		as if his demeanour there were the highest proof he
		gave of what a fund of worth and genuine manhood
		was in him. If we think of it, few heavier burdens
		could be laid on the strength of a man. So sudden;
		all common <i>Lionism</i>, which ruins innumerable men,
		was as nothing to this. It is as if Napoleon had been
		made a King of, not gradually, but at once from the
		Artillery Lieutenancy in the Regiment La Fère. Burns,
		still only in his twenty-seventh year, is no longer even
		a ploughman; he is flying to the West Indies to escape
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page421" name="page421"></a>421</span>disgrace and a jail. This month he is a ruined peasant,
		his wages seven pounds a year, and these gone from
		him: next month he is in the blaze of rank and beauty,
		handing down jewelled Duchesses to dinner; the
		cynosure of all eyes! Adversity is sometimes hard
		upon a man; but for one man who can stand prosperity,
		there are a hundred that will stand adversity. I admire
		much the way in which Burns met all this. Perhaps
		no man one could point out, was ever so sorely tried,
		and so little forgot himself. Tranquil, unastonished;
		not abashed, not inflated, neither awkwardness nor
		affectation: he feels that <em>he</em> there is the man Robert
		Burns; that the &#8216;rank is but the guinea-stamp;&#8217; that
		the celebrity is but the candle-light, which will show
		<em>what</em> man, not in the least make him a better or other
		man! Alas, it may readily, unless he look to it, make
		him a <em>worse</em> man; a wretched inflated wind-bag,&#8212;inflated
		till he <em>burst</em> and become a <em>dead</em> lion; for whom,
		as some one has said, &#8216;there is no resurrection of the
		body;&#8217; worse than a living dog!&#8212;Burns is admirable
		here.</p>

		<p>And yet, alas, as I have observed elsewhere, these
		Lion-hunters were the ruin and death of Burns. It was
		they that rendered it impossible for him to live! They
		gathered round him in his Farm; hindered his industry;
		no place was remote enough from them. He
		could not get his Lionism forgotten, honestly as he was
		disposed to do so. He falls into discontents, into
		miseries, faults; the world getting ever more desolate
		for him; health, character, peace of mind all gone;&#8212;solitary
		enough now. It is tragical to think of! These
		men came but to <em>see</em> him; it was out of no sympathy
		with him, nor no hatred to him. They came to get a
		little amusement: they got their amusement;&#8212;and the
		Hero&#8217;s life went for it!</p>

		<p>Richter says, in the Island of Sumatra, there is a
		kind of &#8216;Light-chafers,&#8217; large Fire-flies, which people
		stick upon spits, and illuminate the ways with at night.
		Persons of condition can thus travel with a pleasant
		radiance, which they much admire. Great honour to
		the Fire-flies! But&#8212;!&#8212;</p>
	</div>
	<div id="lecturevi" class="lecture">
		<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page422" name="page422"></a>422</span></p>
		<p class="lecture_head">LECTURE VI</p>

		<h3 class="lecture_title">THE HERO AS KING. CROMWELL, NAPOLEON: MODERN REVOLUTIONISM.</h3>

		<p class="lecture_date">[Friday, 22nd May 1840]</p>


		<p><span class="first_word">We</span> come now to the last form of Heroism; that
		which we call Kingship. The Commander over men;
		he to whose will our wills are to be subordinated, and
		loyally surrender themselves, and find their welfare in
		doing so, may be reckoned the most important of Great
		Men. He is practically the summary for us of <em>all</em> the
		various figures of Heroism; Priest, Teacher, whatsoever
		of earthly or of spiritual dignity we can fancy to
		reside in a man, embodies itself here, to <em>command</em> over
		us, to furnish us with constant practical teaching, to
		tell us for the day and hour what we are to <em>do</em>. He is
		called <i>Rex</i>, Regulator, <i>Roi</i>: our own name is still
		better; King, <i>Könning</i>, which means <em>Can</em>-ning, Ableman.</p>

		<p>Numerous considerations, pointing towards deep,
		questionable, and indeed unfathomable regions, present
		themselves here: on the most of which we must
		resolutely for the present forbear to speak at all. As
		Burke said that perhaps fair <i>Trial by Jury</i> was the Soul
		of Government, and that all legislation, administration,
		parliamentary debating, and the rest of it, went on, in
		&#8216;order to bring twelve impartial men into a jury-box;&#8217;&#8212;so,
		by much stronger reason, may I say here, that the
		finding of your <i>Ableman</i> and getting him invested with
		the <em>symbols of ability</em>, with dignity, worship (<em>worth</em>-ship),
		royalty, kinghood, or whatever we call it, so that
		<em>he</em> may actually have room to guide according to his
		faculty of doing it,&#8212;is the business, well or ill accomplished,
		of all social procedure whatsoever in this world!
		Hustings-speeches, Parliamentary motions, Reform
		Bills, French Revolutions, all mean at heart this; or
		else nothing. Find in any country the Ablest Man that
		exists there; raise <em>him</em> to the supreme place, and loyally
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page423" name="page423"></a>423</span>reverence him: you have a perfect government for that
		country; no ballot-box, parliamentary eloquence, voting,
		constitution-building, or other machinery whatsoever
		can improve it a whit. It is in the perfect state:
		an ideal country. The Ablest Man; he means also the
		truest-hearted, justest, the Noblest Man: what he <i>tells
		us to do</i> must be precisely the wisest, fittest, that we
		could anywhere or anyhow learn;&#8212;the thing which it
		will in all ways behove us, with right loyal thankfulness,
		and nothing doubting, to do! Our <em>doing</em> and life were
		then, so far as government could regulate it, well
		regulated; that were the ideal of constitutions.</p>

		<p>Alas, we know very well that Ideals can never be
		completely embodied in practice. Ideals must ever lie
		a very great way off; and we will right thankfully content
		ourselves with any not intolerable approximation
		thereto! Let no man, as Schiller says, too querulously
		&#8216;measure by a scale of perfection the meagre product of
		reality&#8217; in this poor world of ours. We will esteem him
		no wise man; we will esteem him a sickly, discontented,
		foolish man. And yet, on the other hand, it is never
		to be forgotten that Ideals do exist; that if they be
		not approximated to at all, the whole matter goes to
		wreck! Infallibly. No bricklayer builds a wall <em>perfectly</em>
		perpendicular, mathematically this is not possible;
		a certain degree of perpendicularity suffices him; and
		he, like a good bricklayer, who must have done with
		his job, leaves it so. And yet if he sway <em>too much</em>
		from the perpendicular; above all, if he throw plummet
		and level quite away from him, and pile brick on brick
		heedless, just as it comes to hand&#8212;! Such bricklayer,
		I think, is in a bad way. <em>He</em> has forgotten himself:
		but the Law of Gravitation does not forget to act on
		him; he and his wall rush-down into confused welter of
		ruin!&#8212;</p>

		<p>This is the history of all rebellions, French Revolutions,
		social explosions in ancient or modern times.
		You have put the too <em>Un</em>able man at the head of affairs!
		The too ignoble, unvaliant, fatuous man. You have
		forgotten that there is any rule, or natural necessity
		whatever, of putting the Able Man there. Brick must
		lie on brick as it may and can. Unable Simulacrum of
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page424" name="page424"></a>424</span>Ability, <em>quack</em>, in a word, must adjust himself with
		quack, in all manner of administration of human things;&#8212;which
		accordingly lie unadministered, fermenting into
		unmeasured masses of failure, of indigent misery: in
		the outward, and in the inward or spiritual, miserable
		millions stretch-out the hand for their due supply, and
		it is not there. The &#8216;law of gravitation&#8217; acts; Nature&#8217;s
		laws do none of them forget to act. The miserable
		millions burst-forth into Sansculottism, or some other
		sort of madness; bricks and bricklayers lie as a fatal
		chaos!&#8212;</p>

		<p>Much sorry stuff, written some hundred years ago or
		more, about the &#8216;Divine right of Kings,&#8217; moulders
		unread now in the Public Libraries of this country.
		Far be it from us to disturb the calm process by which
		it is disappearing harmlessly from the earth, in those
		repositories! At the same time, not to let the immense
		rubbish go without leaving us, as it ought, some soul
		of it behind&#8212;I will say that it did mean something;
		something true, which it is important for us and all
		men to keep in mind. To assert that in whatever man
		you chose to lay hold of (by this or the other plan of
		clutching at him); and clapt a round piece of metal on
		the head of, and called King,&#8212;there straightway came
		to reside a divine virtue, so that <em>he</em> became a kind of
		God, and a Divinity inspired him with faculty and right
		to rule over you to all lengths: this,&#8212;what can we do
		with this but leave it to rot silently in the Public
		Libraries? But I will say withal, and that is what these
		Divine-right men meant, That in Kings, and in all
		human Authorities, and relations that men god-created
		can form among each other, there is verily either a Divine
		Right or else a Diabolic Wrong; one or the other of these
		two! For it is false altogether, what the last Sceptical
		Century taught us, that this world is a steam-engine.
		There is a God in this world; and a God&#8217;s-sanction, or
		else the violation of such, does look-out from all ruling
		and obedience, from all moral acts of men. There is
		no act more moral between men than that of rule and
		obedience. Woe to him that claims obedience when it
		is not due; woe to him that refuses it when it is!
		God&#8217;s law is in that, I say, however the Parchment-laws
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page425" name="page425"></a>425</span>may run: there is a Divine Right or else a Diabolic
		Wrong at the heart of every claim that one man makes
		upon another.</p>

		<p>It can do none of us harm to reflect on this: in all
		the relations of life it will concern us; in Loyalty and
		Royalty, the highest of these. I esteem the modern
		error, That all goes by self-interest and the checking
		and balancing of greedy knaveries, and that, in short,
		there is nothing divine whatever in the association of
		men, a still more despicable error, natural as it is to
		an unbelieving century, than that of a &#8216;divine right&#8217;
		in people <em>called</em> Kings. I say, Find me the true <i>Könning</i>,
		King, or Able-man, and he <em>has</em> a divine right over
		me. That we knew in some tolerable measure how to
		find him, and that all men were ready to acknowledge
		his divine right when found: this is precisely the healing
		which a sick world is everywhere, in these ages,
		seeking after! The true King, as guide of the practical,
		has ever something of the Pontiff in him,&#8212;guide of
		the spiritual, from which all practice has its rise. This
		too is a true saying, That the <i>King</i> is head of the
		<i>Church</i>.&#8212;But we will leave the Polemic stuff of a dead
		century to lie quiet on its bookshelves.</p>

		<p class="post_thoughtbreak">Certainly it is a fearful business, that of having your
		Ableman to <em>seek</em>, and not knowing in what manner to
		proceed about it! That is the world&#8217;s sad predicament
		in these times of ours. They are times of Revolution,
		and have long been. The bricklayer with his bricks,
		no longer heedful of plummet or the law of gravitation,
		have toppled, tumbled, and it all welters as we see! But
		the beginning of it was not the French Revolution; that
		is rather the <em>end</em>, we can hope. It were truer to say,
		the <em>beginning</em> was three centuries farther back: in the
		Reformation of Luther. That the thing which still
		called itself Christian Church had become a Falsehood,
		and brazenly went about pretending to pardon men&#8217;s
		sins for metallic coined money, and to do much else
		which in the everlasting truth of Nature it did <em>not</em> now
		do: here lay the vital malady. The inward being
		wrong, all outward went ever more and more wrong.
		Belief died away; all was Doubt, Disbelief. The builder
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page426" name="page426"></a>426</span><em>cast away</em> his plummet; said to himself, &#8220;What is
		gravitation? Brick lies on brick there!&#8221; Alas, does
		it not still sound strange to many of us, the assertion
		that there is a God&#8217;s truth in the business of god-created
		men; that all is not a kind of grimace, an &#8216;expediency,&#8217;
		diplomacy, one knows not what!&#8212;</p>

		<p>From that first necessary assertion of Luther&#8217;s, &#8220;You,
		self-styled <em>Papa</em>, you are no Father in God at all; you
		are&#8212;a Chimera, whom I know not how to name in
		polite language!&#8221;&#8212;from that onwards to the shout
		which rose round Camille Desmoulins in the Palais-Royal,
		&#8220;<i>Aux armes!</i>&#8221; when the people had burst-up against
		<em>all</em> manner of Chimeras,&#8212;I find a natural historical
		sequence. That shout too, so frightful, half-infernal,
		was a great matter. Once more the voice of awakened
		nations; starting confusedly, as out of nightmare, as
		out of death-sleep, into some dim feeling that Life was
		real; that God&#8217;s-world was not an expediency and
		diplomacy! Infernal;&#8212;yes, since they would not have
		it otherwise. Infernal, since not celestial or terrestrial!&#8212;Hollowness,
		insincerity <em>has</em> to cease;&#8212;sincerity of
		some sort has to begin. Cost what it may, reigns of
		terror, horrors of French Revolution or what else, we
		have to return to truth. Here is a Truth, as I said:
		a Truth clad in hell-fire, since they would not but have
		it so!&#8212;</p>

		<p>A common theory among considerable parties of men
		in England and elsewhere used to be, that the French
		Nation had, in those days, as it were gone <em>mad</em>; that
		the French Revolution was a general act of insanity,
		a temporary conversion of France and large sections
		of the world into a kind of Bedlam. The Event had
		risen and raged; but was a madness and nonentity,&#8212;gone
		now happily into the region of Dreams and the
		Picturesque!&#8212;To such comfortable philosophers, the
		Three Days of July 1830 must have been a surprising
		phenomenon. Here is the French Nation risen again,
		in musketry and death-struggle, out shooting and being
		shot, to make that same mad French Revolution good!
		The sons and grandsons of those men, it would seem,
		persist in the enterprise: they do not disown it; they
		will have it made good; will have themselves shot, if
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page427" name="page427"></a>427</span>it be not made good! To philosophers who had made-up
		their life-system on that &#8216;madness&#8217; quietus, no
		phenomenon could be more alarming. Poor Niebuhr,
		they say, the Prussian Professor and Historian, fell
		broken-hearted in consequence; sickened, if we can
		believe it, and died of the Three Days! It was surely
		not a very heroic death;&#8212;little better than Racine&#8217;s,
		dying because Louis Fourteenth looked sternly on him
		once. The world had stood some considerable shocks,
		in its time; might have been expected to survive the
		Three Days too, and be found turning on its axis after
		even them! The Three Days told all mortals that the
		old French Revolution, mad as it might look, was not
		a transitory ebullition of Bedlam, but a genuine product
		of this Earth where we all live; that it was verily a
		Fact, and that the world in general would do well everywhere
		to regard it as such.</p>

		<p>Truly, without the French Revolution, one would not
		know what to make of an age like this at all. We will
		hail the French Revolution, as shipwrecked mariners
		might the sternest rock, in a world otherwise all of
		baseless sea and waves. A true Apocalypse, though a
		terrible one, to this false withered artificial time; testifying
		once more that Nature is <em>preter</em>natural; if not
		divine, then diabolic; that Semblance is not reality;
		that it has to become reality, or the world will take-fire
		under it,&#8212;burn <em>it</em> into what it is, namely Nothing!
		Plausibility has ended; empty Routine has ended; much
		has ended. This, as with a Trump of Doom, has been
		proclaimed to all men. They are the wisest who will
		learn it soonest. Long confused generations before it
		be learned; peace impossible till it be! The earnest
		man, surrounded, as ever, with a world of inconsistencies,
		can await patiently, patiently strive to do <em>his</em>
		work, in the midst of that. Sentence of Death is
		written down in Heaven against all that; sentence
		of Death is now proclaimed on the Earth against it:
		this he with his eyes may see. And surely, I should
		say, considering the other side of the matter, what
		enormous difficulties lie there, and how fast, fearfully
		fast, in all countries, the inexorable demand for solution
		of them is pressing on,&#8212;he may easily find other
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page428" name="page428"></a>428</span>work to do than labouring in the Sansculottic province
		at this time of day!</p>

		<p>To me, in these circumstances, that of &#8216;Hero-worship&#8217;
		becomes a fact inexpressibly precious; the most
		solacing fact one sees in the world at present. There
		is an everlasting hope in it for the management of the
		world. Had all traditions, arrangements, creeds,
		societies that men ever instituted, sunk away, this would
		remain. The certainty of Heroes being sent us; our
		faculty, our necessity, to reverence Heroes when sent:
		it shines like a polestar through smoke-clouds, dust-clouds,
		and all manner of down-rushing and conflagration.</p>

		<p>Hero-worship would have sounded very strange to
		those workers and fighters in the French Revolution.
		Not reverence for Great Men; not any hope or belief,
		or even wish, that Great Men could again appear in
		the world! Nature, turned into a &#8216;Machine,&#8217; was as
		if effete now; could not any longer produce Great Men:&#8212;I
		can tell her, she may give-up the trade altogether,
		then; we cannot do without Great Men!&#8212;But neither
		have I any quarrel with that of &#8216;Liberty and Equality;&#8217;
		with the faith that, wise great men being impossible, a
		level immensity of foolish small men would suffice. It
		was a natural faith then and there. &#8220;Liberty and
		Equality; no Authority needed any longer. Hero-worship,
		reverence for <em>such</em> Authorities, has proved
		false, is itself a falsehood; no more of it! We have
		had such <em>forgeries</em>, we will now trust nothing. So
		many base plated coins passing in the market, the
		belief has now become common that no gold any longer
		exists,&#8212;and even that we can do very well without
		gold!&#8221; I find this, among other things, in that universal
		cry of Liberty and Equality; and find it very
		natural, as matters then stood.</p>

		<p>And yet surely it is but the <em>transition</em> from false to
		true. Considered as the whole truth, it is false altogether;&#8212;the
		product of entire sceptical blindness, as
		yet only <em>struggling</em> to see. Hero-worship exists forever,
		and everywhere: not Loyalty alone; it extends
		from divine adoration down to the lowest practical
		regions of life. &#8216;Bending before men,&#8217; if it is not to
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page429" name="page429"></a>429</span>be a mere empty grimace, better dispensed with than
		practised, is Hero-worship,&#8212;a recognition that there
		does dwell in that presence of our brother something
		divine; that every created man, as Novalis said, is a
		&#8216;revelation in the Flesh.&#8217; They were Poets too, that
		devised all those graceful courtesies which make life
		noble! Courtesy is not a falsehood or grimace; it
		need not be such. And Loyalty, religious Worship
		itself, are still possible; nay still inevitable.</p>

		<p>May we not say, moreover, while so many of our
		late Heroes have worked rather as revolutionary men,
		that nevertheless every Great Man, every genuine man,
		is by the nature of him a son of Order, not of Disorder?
		It is a tragical position for a true man to work in revolutions.
		He seems an anarchist; and indeed a painful
		element of anarchy does encumber him at every step,&#8212;him
		to whose whole soul anarchy is hostile, hateful.
		His mission is Order; every man&#8217;s is. He is here to
		make what was disorderly, chaotic, into a thing ruled,
		regular. He is the missionary of Order. Is not all
		work of man in this world a <em>making of Order</em>? The
		carpenter finds rough trees: shapes them, constrains
		them into square fitness, into purpose and use. We
		are all born enemies of Disorder: it is tragical for us
		all to be concerned in image-breaking and down-pulling;
		for the Great Man, <em>more</em> a man than we, it is
		doubly tragical.</p>

		<p>Thus too all human things, maddest French Sansculottisms,
		do and must work towards Order. I say,
		there is not a <em>man</em> in them, raging in the thickest of
		the madness, but is impelled withal, at all moments,
		towards Order. His very life means that; Disorder is
		dissolution, death. No chaos but it seeks a <em>centre</em> to
		revolve round. While man is man, some Cromwell or
		Napoleon is the necessary finish of a Sansculottism.&#8212;Curious:
		in those days when Hero-worship was the
		most incredible thing to every one, how it does come-out
		nevertheless, and assert itself practically, in a way
		which all have to credit. Divine <em>right</em>, take it on the
		great scale, is found to mean divine <em>might</em> withal!
		While old false Formulas are getting trampled everywhere
		into destruction, new genuine Substances unexpectedly
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page430" name="page430"></a>430</span>unfold themselves indestructible. In rebellious
		ages, when Kingship itself seems dead and abolished,
		Cromwell, Napoleon step-forth again as Kings. The
		history of these men is what we have now to look at,
		as our last phasis of Heroism. The old ages are
		brought back to us; the manner in which Kings were
		made, and Kingship itself first took rise, is again
		exhibited in the history of these Two.</p>

		<p class="post_thoughtbreak">We have had many civil-wars in England; wars of
		Red and White Roses, wars of Simon de Montfort;
		wars enough, which are not very memorable. But
		that war of the Puritans has a significance which belongs
		to no one of the others. Trusting to your candour,
		which will suggest on the other side what I have
		not room to say, I will call it a section once more of
		that great universal war which alone makes-up the true
		History of the World,&#8212;the war of Belief against Unbelief!
		The struggle of men intent on the real essence
		of things, against men intent on the semblances and
		forms of things. The Puritans, to many, seem mere
		savage Iconoclasts, fierce destroyers of Forms; but it
		were more just to call them haters of <em>untrue</em> Forms.
		I hope we know how to respect Laud and his King as
		well as them. Poor Laud seems to me to have been
		weak and ill-starred, not dishonest; an unfortunate
		Pedant rather than anything worse. His &#8216;Dreams&#8217;
		and superstitions, at which they laugh so, have an
		affectionate, lovable kind of character. He is like a
		College-Tutor, whose whole world is forms, College-rules;
		whose notion is that these are the life and safety of
		the world. He is placed suddenly, with that unalterable
		luckless notion of his, at the head not of a College but
		of a Nation, to regulate the most complex deep-reaching
		interests of men. He thinks they ought to go by the
		old decent regulations; nay that their salvation will lie
		in extending and improving these. Like a weak man,
		he drives with spasmodic vehemence towards his purpose;
		cramps himself to it, heeding no voice of prudence,
		no cry of pity: He will have his College-rules
		obeyed by his Collegians; that first; and till that,
		nothing. He is an ill-starred Pedant, as I said. He
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page431" name="page431"></a>431</span>would have it the world was a College of that kind,
		and the world <em>was not</em> that. Alas, was not his doom
		stern enough? Whatever wrongs he did, were they
		not all frightfully avenged on him?</p>

		<p>It is meritorious to insist on forms; Religion and all
		else naturally clothes itself in forms. Everywhere the
		<em>formed</em> world is the only habitable one. The naked
		formlessness of Puritanism is not the thing I praise
		in the Puritans; it is the thing I pity,&#8212;praising only
		the spirit which had rendered that inevitable! All substances
		clothe themselves in forms: but there are suitable
		true forms, and then there are untrue unsuitable.
		As the briefest definition, one might say, Forms which
		<em>grow</em> round a substance, if we rightly understand that,
		will correspond to the real nature and purport of it,
		will be true, good; forms which are consciously <em>put</em>
		round a substance, bad. I invite you to reflect on this.
		It distinguishes true from false in Ceremonial Form,
		earnest solemnity from empty pageant, in all human
		things.</p>

		<p>There must be a veracity, a natural spontaneity in
		forms. In the commonest meeting of men, a person
		making, what we call, &#8216;set speeches,&#8217; is not he an
		offence? In the mere drawing-room, whatsoever
		courtesies you see to be grimaces, prompted by no
		spontaneous reality within, are a thing you wish to get
		away from. But suppose now it were some matter of
		vital concernment, some transcendent matter (as Divine
		Worship is), about which your whole soul, struck dumb
		with its excess of feeling, knew not how to <em>form</em> itself
		into utterance at all, and preferred formless silence to
		any utterance there possible,&#8212;what should we say of
		a man coming forward to represent or utter it for you
		in the way of upholsterer-mummery? Such a man,&#8212;let
		him depart swiftly, if he love himself! You have
		lost your only son; are mute, struck down, without
		even tears: an importunate man importunately offers
		to celebrate Funeral Games for him in the manner of
		the Greeks! Such mummery is not only not to be
		accepted,&#8212;it is hateful, unendurable. It is what the
		old Prophets called &#8216;Idolatry,&#8217; worshipping of hollow
		<em>shows</em>; what all earnest men do and will reject. We
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page432" name="page432"></a>432</span>can partly understand what those poor Puritans meant.
		Laud dedicating that St. Catherine Creed&#8217;s Church, in
		the manner we have it described; with his multiplied
		ceremonial bowings, gesticulations, exclamations:
		surely it is rather the rigorous formal <i>Pedant</i>, intent on
		his &#8216;College-rules,&#8217; than the earnest Prophet, intent on
		the essence of the matter!</p>

		<p>Puritanism found <em>such</em> forms insupportable; trampled
		on such forms;&#8212;we have to excuse it for saying, No
		form at all rather than such! It stood preaching in its
		bare pulpit, with nothing but the Bible in its hand.
		Nay, a man preaching from his earnest <em>soul</em> into the
		earnest <em>souls</em> of men: is not this virtually the essence
		of all Churches whatsoever? The nakedest, savagest
		reality, I say, is preferable to any semblance, however
		dignified. Besides, it will clothe itself with <em>due</em> semblance
		by and by, if it be real. No fear of that; actually
		no fear at all. Given the living <em>man</em>, there will be
		found <em>clothes</em> for him; he will find himself clothes. But
		the suit-of-clothes pretending that <em>it</em> is both clothes and
		man&#8212;!&#8212;We cannot &#8216;fight the French&#8217; by three-hundred-thousand
		red uniforms; there must be <em>men</em> in
		the inside of them! Semblance, I assert, must actually
		<em>not</em> divorce itself from Reality. If Semblance do,&#8212;why
		then there must be men found to rebel against Semblance,
		for it has become a lie! These two Antagonisms
		at war here, in the case of Laud and the Puritans,
		are as old nearly as the world. They went to fierce
		battle over England in that age; and fought-out their
		confused controversy to a certain length, with many
		results for all of us.</p>

		<p class="post_thoughtbreak">In the age which directly followed that of the Puritans,
		their cause or themselves were little likely to have justice
		done them. Charles Second and his Rochesters were
		not the kind of men you would set to judge what the
		worth or meaning of such men might have been. That
		there could be any faith or truth in the life of a man,
		was what these poor Rochesters, and the age they
		ushered-in, had forgotten. Puritanism was hung on
		gibbets,&#8212;like the bones of the leading Puritans. Its
		work nevertheless went on accomplishing itself. All
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page433" name="page433"></a>433</span>true work of a man, hang the author of it on what gibbet
		you like, must and will accomplish itself. We have our
		<i>Habeas-Corpus</i>, our free Representation of the People;
		acknowledgment, wide as the world, that all men are,
		or else must, shall, and will become, what we call <em>free</em>
		men;&#8212;men with their life grounded on reality and
		justice, not on tradition, which has become unjust and
		a chimera! This in part and much besides this, was
		the work of the Puritans.</p>

		<p>And indeed, as these things became gradually manifest,
		the character of the Puritans began to clear itself.
		Their memories were, one after another, taken <em>down</em>
		from the gibbet; nay a certain portion of them are now,
		in these days, as good as canonised. Eliot, Hampden,
		Pym, nay Ludlow, Hutchinson, Vane himself, are admitted
		to be a kind of Heroes; political Conscript
		Fathers, to whom in no small degree we owe what
		makes us a free England: it would not be safe for anybody
		to designate these men as wicked now. Few
		Puritans of note but find their apologists somewhere,
		and have a certain reverence paid them by earnest men.
		One Puritan, I think, and almost he alone, our poor
		Cromwell, seems to hang yet on the gibbet, and find
		no hearty apologist anywhere. Him neither saint nor
		sinner will acquit of great wickedness. A man of
		ability, infinite talent, courage, and so forth: but he
		betrayed the Cause. Selfish ambition, dishonesty,
		duplicity; a fierce, coarse, hypocritical <i>Tartufe</i>; turning
		all that noble Struggle for constitutional Liberty
		into a sorry farce played for his own benefit: this and
		worse is the character they give of Cromwell. And then
		there come contrasts with Washington and others;
		above all, with these noble Pyms and Hampdens, whose
		noble work he stole for himself, and ruined into a futility
		and deformity.</p>

		<p>This view of Cromwell seems to me the not unnatural
		product of a century like the Eighteenth. As we said of
		the Valet, so of the Sceptic: He does not know a Hero
		when he sees him! The Valet expected purple mantles,
		gilt sceptres, body-guards and flourishes of trumpets:
		the Sceptic of the Eighteenth century looks for regulated
		respectable Formulas, &#8216;Principles,&#8217; or what else he
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page434" name="page434"></a>434</span>may call them; a style of speech and conduct which
		has got to seem &#8216;respectable,&#8217; which can plead for itself
		in a handsome articulate manner, and gain the suffrages
		of an enlightened sceptical Eighteenth century! It is,
		at bottom, the same thing that both the Valet and he
		expect: the garnitures of some <em>acknowledged</em> royalty,
		which <em>then</em> they will acknowledge! The King coming
		to them in the rugged <em>un</em>formulistic state shall be no
		King.</p>

		<p>For my own share, far be it from me to say or insinuate
		a word of disparagement against such characters as
		Hampden, Eliot, Pym; whom I believe to have been
		right worthy and useful men. I have read diligently
		what books and documents about them I could come
		at;&#8212;with the honestest wish to admire, to love and
		worship them like Heroes; but I am sorry to say,
		if the real truth must be told, with very indifferent success!
		At bottom, I found that it would not do. They
		are very noble men, these; step along in their stately
		way, with their measured euphemisms, philosophies,
		parliamentary eloquences, Ship-moneys, <i>Monarchies of
		Man</i>; a most constitutional, unblamable, dignified set
		of men. But the heart remains cold before them; the
		fancy alone endeavours to get-up some worship of them.
		What man&#8217;s heart does, in reality, break-forth into any
		fire of brotherly love for these men? They are become
		dreadfully dull men! One breaks-down often enough
		in the constitutional eloquence of the admirable Pym,
		with his &#8216;seventhly and lastly.&#8217; You find that it may
		be the admirablest thing in the world, but that it is
		heavy,&#8212;heavy as lead, barren as brick-clay; that, in a
		word, for you there is little or nothing now surviving
		there! One leaves all these Nobilities standing in their
		niches of honour: the rugged out-cast Cromwell, he is
		the man of them all in whom one still finds human stuff.
		The great savage <i>Baresark</i>: he could write no euphemistic
		<i>Monarchy of Man</i>; did not speak, did not work
		with glib regularity; had no straight story to tell for
		himself anywhere. But he stood bare, not cased in
		euphemistic coat-of-mail; he grappled like a giant, face
		to face, heart to heart, with the naked truth of things!
		That, after all, is the sort of man for one. I plead
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page435" name="page435"></a>435</span>guilty to valuing such a man beyond all other sorts of
		men. Smooth-shaven Respectabilities not a few one
		finds, that are not good for much. Small thanks to a
		man for keeping his hands clean, who would not touch
		the work but with gloves on!</p>

		<p>Neither, on the whole, does this constitutional tolerance
		of the Eighteenth century for the other happier
		Puritans seem to be a very great matter. One might
		say, it is but a piece of Formulism and Scepticism, like
		the rest. They tell us, It was a sorrowful thing to consider
		that the foundation of our English Liberties should
		have been laid by &#8216;Superstition.&#8217; These Puritans came
		forward with Calvinistic incredible Creeds, Anti-Laudisms,
		Westminster Confessions; demanding, chiefly of
		all, that they should have liberty to <em>worship</em> in their own
		way. Liberty to <em>tax</em> themselves: that was the thing they
		should have demanded! It was Superstition, Fanaticism,
		disgraceful Ignorance of Constitutional Philosophy to
		insist on the other thing!&#8212;Liberty to <em>tax</em> oneself? Not
		to pay-out money from your pocket except on reason
		shown? No century, I think, but a rather barren one
		would have fixed on that as the first right of man! I
		should say, on the contrary, A just man will generally
		have better cause than <em>money</em> in what shape soever,
		before deciding to revolt against his Government. Ours
		is a most confused world; in which a good man will be
		thankful to see any kind of Government maintain itself
		in a not insupportable manner; and here in England,
		to this hour, if he is not ready to pay a great many taxes
		which <em>he</em> can see very small reason in, it will not go
		well with him, I think! He must try some other climate
		than this. Taxgatherer? Money? He will say:
		&#8220;Take my money, since you <em>can</em>, and it is so desirable
		to you; take it,&#8212;and take yourself away with it; and
		leave me alone to my work here. <em>I</em> am still here; can
		still work, after all the money you have taken from
		me!&#8221; But if they come to him, and say, &#8220;Acknowledge
		a Lie; pretend to say you are worshipping God,
		when you are not doing it: believe not the thing that
		<em>you</em> find true, but the thing that I find, or pretend to
		find true!&#8221; He will answer: &#8220;No; by God&#8217;s help,
		no! You may take my purse; but I cannot have my
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page436" name="page436"></a>436</span>moral Self annihilated. The purse is any Highwayman&#8217;s
		who might meet me with a loaded pistol: but
		the Self is mine and God my Maker&#8217;s; it is not yours;
		and I will resist you to the death, and revolt against
		you, and, on the whole, front all manner of extremities,
		accusations and confusions, in defence of that!&#8221;&#8212;</p>

		<p>Really, it seems to me the one reason which could
		justify revolting, this of the Puritans. It has been the
		soul of all just revolts among men. Not <i>Hunger</i> alone
		produced even the French Revolution: no, but the feeling
		of the insupportable all-pervading <i>Falsehood</i> which
		had now embodied itself in Hunger, in universal material
		Scarcity and Nonentity, and thereby become <em>indisputably</em>
		false in the eyes of all! We will leave the Eighteenth
		century with its &#8216;liberty to tax itself.&#8217; We will
		not astonish ourselves that the meaning of such men as
		the Puritans remained dim to it. To men who believe
		in no reality at all, how shall a <em>real</em> human soul, the
		intensest of all realities, as it were the Voice of this
		world&#8217;s Maker still speaking to <em>us</em>,&#8212;be intelligible?
		What it cannot reduce into constitutional doctrines
		relative to &#8216;taxing,&#8217; or other the like material interest,
		gross, palpable to the sense, such a century will needs
		reject as an amorphous heap of rubbish. Hampdens,
		Pyms, and Ship-money will be the theme of much constitutional
		eloquence, striving to be fervid;&#8212;which will
		glitter, if not as fire does, then as <em>ice</em> does: and the
		irreducible Cromwell will remain a chaotic mass of
		&#8216;madness,&#8217; &#8216;hypocrisy,&#8217; and much else.</p>

		<p class="post_thoughtbreak">From of old, I will confess, this theory of Cromwell&#8217;s
		falsity has been incredible to me. Nay I cannot believe
		the like, of any Great Man whatever. Multitudes of
		Great Men figure in History as false selfish men; but
		if we will consider it, they are but <em>figures</em> for us, unintelligible
		shadows; we do not see into them as men
		that could have existed at all. A superficial unbelieving
		generation only, with no eye but for the surfaces and
		semblances of things, could form such notions of Great
		Men. Can a great soul be possible without a <em>conscience</em>
		in it, the essence of all <em>real</em> souls, great or small?&#8212;No,
		we cannot figure Cromwell as a Falsity and Fatuity;
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page437" name="page437"></a>437</span>the longer I study him and his career, I believe this the
		less. Why should we? There is no evidence of it.
		Is it not strange that, after all the mountains of calumny
		this man has been subject to, after being represented
		as the very prince of liars, who never, or hardly ever,
		spoke truth, but always some cunning counterfeit of
		truth, there should not yet have been one falsehood
		brought clearly home to him? A prince of liars, and
		no lie spoken by him. Not one that I could yet get
		sight of. It is like Pococke asking Grotius, Where is
		your <em>proof</em> of Mahomet&#8217;s Pigeon? No proof!&#8212;Let us
		leave all these calumnious chimeras, as chimeras ought
		to be left. They are not portraits of the man; they are
		distracted phantasms of him, the joint product of hatred
		and darkness.</p>

		<p>Looking at the man&#8217;s life with our own eyes, it seems
		to me, a very different hypothesis suggests itself. What
		little we know of his earlier obscure years, distorted as
		it has come down to us, does it not all betoken an earnest,
		affectionate, sincere kind of man? His nervous
		melancholic temperament indicates rather a seriousness
		too deep for him. Of those stories of &#8216;Spectres;&#8217; of
		the white Spectre in broad daylight, predicting that he
		should be King of England, we are not bound to believe
		much;&#8212;probably no more than of the other black
		Spectre, or Devil in person, to whom the Officer <em>saw</em>
		him sell himself before Worcester Fight! But the
		mournful, over-sensitive, hypochondriac humour of
		Oliver, in his young years, is otherwise indisputably
		known. The Huntingdon Physician told Sir Philip
		Warwick himself, He had often been sent for at midnight;
		Mr. Cromwell was full of hypochondria, thought
		himself near dying, and &#8220;had fancies about the Town-cross.&#8221;
		These things are significant. Such an excitable
		deep-feeling nature, in that rugged stubborn
		strength of his, is not the symptom of falsehood; it is
		the symptom and promise of quite other than falsehood!</p>

		<p>The young Oliver is sent to study Law; falls, or is
		said to have fallen, for a little period, into some of the
		dissipations of youth; but if so, speedily repents,
		abandons all this: not much above twenty, he is married,
		settled as an altogether grave and quiet man. &#8216;He
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page438" name="page438"></a>438</span>pays-back what money he had won at gambling,&#8217; says
		the story;&#8212;he does not think any gain of that kind
		could be really <em>his</em>. It is very interesting, very natural,
		this &#8216;conversion,&#8217; as they well name it; this awakening
		of a great true soul from the worldly slough, to see
		into the awful <em>truth</em> of things;&#8212;to see that time and its
		shows all rested on Eternity, and this poor Earth of
		ours was the threshold either of Heaven or of Hell!
		Oliver&#8217;s life at St Ives or Ely, as a sober industrious
		Farmer, is it not altogether as that of a true and devout
		man? He has renounced the world and its ways; <em>its</em>
		prizes are not the thing that can enrich him. He tills
		the earth; he reads his Bible; daily assembles his
		servants round him to worship God. He comforts persecuted
		ministers, is fond of preachers; nay can himself
		preach,&#8212;exhorts his neighbours to be wise, to redeem
		the time. In all this what &#8216;hypocrisy,&#8217; &#8216;ambition,&#8217;
		&#8216;cant,&#8217; or other falsity? The man&#8217;s hopes, I do believe,
		were fixed on the other Higher World; his aim to get
		well <em>thither</em>, by walking well through his humble course
		in <em>this</em> world. He courts no notice: what could notice
		here do for him? &#8216;Ever in his great Taskmaster&#8217;s
		eye.&#8217;</p>

		<p>It is striking, too, how he comes-out once into public
		view; he, since no other is willing to come: in resistance
		to a public grievance. I mean, in that matter of
		the Bedford Fens. No one else will go to law with
		Authority; therefore he will. That matter once settled,
		he returns back into obscurity, to his Bible and his
		Plough. &#8216;Gain influence&#8217;? His influence is the most
		legitimate; derived from personal knowledge of him,
		as a just, religious, reasonable and determined man.
		In this way he has lived till past forty; old age is now
		in view of him, and the earnest portal of Death and
		Eternity; it was at this point that he suddenly became
		&#8216;ambitious&#8217;! I do not interpret his Parliamentary
		mission in that way!</p>

		<p>His successes in Parliament, his successes through
		the war, are honest successes of a brave man; who
		has more resolution in the heart of him, more light in
		the head of him than other men. His prayers to God;
		his spoken thanks to the God of Victory, who had preserved
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page439" name="page439"></a>439</span>him safe, and carried him forward so far, through
		the furious clash of a world all set in conflict, through
		desperate-looking envelopments at Dunbar; through
		the death-hail of so many battles; mercy after mercy;
		to the &#8216;crowning mercy&#8217; of Worcester Fight: all this
		is good and genuine for a deep-hearted Calvinistic Cromwell.
		Only to vain unbelieving Cavaliers, worshipping
		not God but their own &#8216;lovelocks,&#8217; frivolities and formalities,
		living quite apart from contemplations of God,
		living <em>without</em> God in the world, need it seem hypocritical.</p>

		<p>Nor will his participation in the King&#8217;s death involve
		him in condemnation with us. It is a stern business
		killing of a King! But if you once go to war with
		him, it lies <em>there</em>; this and all else lies there. Once
		at war, you have made wager of battle with him: it
		is he to die, or else you. Reconciliation is problematic;
		may be possible, or, far more likely, is impossible. It
		is now pretty generally admitted that the Parliament,
		having vanquished Charles First, had no way of making
		any tenable arrangement with him. The large Presbyterian
		party, apprehensive now of the Independents,
		were most anxious to do so; anxious indeed as for
		their own existence; but it could not be. The unhappy
		Charles, in those final Hampton-Court negotiations,
		shows himself as a man fatally incapable of being dealt
		with. A man who, once for all, could not and would
		not <em>understand</em>:&#8212;whose thought did not in any measure
		represent to him the real fact of the matter; nay worse,
		whose <em>word</em> did not at all represent his thought. We
		may say this of him without cruelty, with deep pity
		rather: but it is true and undeniable. Forsaken there
		of all but the <em>name</em> of Kingship, he still, finding himself
		treated with outward respect as a King, fancied that
		he might play-off party against party, and smuggle himself
		into his old power by deceiving both. Alas, they
		both <em>discovered</em> that he was deceiving them. A man
		whose <em>word</em> will not inform you at all what he means
		or will do, is not a man you can bargain with. You
		must get out of that man&#8217;s way, or put him out of
		yours! The Presbyterians, in their despair, were still
		for believing Charles, though found false, unbelievable
		again and again. Not so Cromwell: &#8220;For all our
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page440" name="page440"></a>440</span>fighting,&#8221; says he, &#8220;we are to have a little bit of
		paper?&#8221; No!&#8212;</p>

		<p>In fact, everywhere we have to note the decisive
		practical <em>eye</em> of this man; how he drives towards the
		practical and practicable; has a genuine insight into
		what <em>is</em> fact. Such an intellect, I maintain, does not
		belong to a false man: the false man sees false shows,
		plausibilities, expediences: the true man is needed to
		discern even practical truth. Cromwell&#8217;s advice about
		the Parliament&#8217;s Army, early in the contest, How they
		were to dismiss their city-tapsters, flimsy riotous
		persons, and choose substantial yeomen, whose heart
		was in the work, to be soldiers for them: this is advice
		by a man who <em>saw</em>. Fact answers, if you see into Fact.
		Cromwell&#8217;s <i>Ironsides</i> were the embodiment of this insight
		of his; men fearing God; and without any other
		fear. No more conclusively genuine set of fighters ever
		trod the soil of England, or of any other land.</p>

		<p>Neither will we blame greatly that word of Cromwell&#8217;s
		to them; which was so blamed: &#8220;If the King should
		meet me in battle, I would kill the King.&#8221; Why not?
		These words were spoken to men who stood as before
		a Higher than Kings. They had set more than their
		own lives on the cast. The Parliament may call it, in
		official language, a fighting &#8216;<em>for</em> the King;&#8217; but we, for
		our share, cannot understand that. To us it is no
		dilettante work, no sleek officiality; it is sheer rough
		death and earnest. They have brought it to the calling-forth
		of <i>War</i>; horrid internecine fight, man grappling
		with man in fire-eyed rage,&#8212;the <em>infernal</em> element in
		man called forth, to try it by that! <em>Do</em> that therefore;
		since that is the thing to be done.&#8212;The successes of
		Cromwell seem to me a very natural thing! Since he
		was not shot in battle, they were an inevitable thing.
		That such a man, with the eye to see, with the heart to
		dare, should advance, from post to post, from victory
		to victory, till the Huntingdon Farmer became, by whatever
		name you might call him, the acknowledged
		Strongest Man in England, virtually the King of England,
		requires no magic to explain it!&#8212;</p>

		<p>Truly it is a sad thing for a people, as for a man,
		to fall into Scepticism, into dilettantism, insincerity;
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page441" name="page441"></a>441</span>not to know a Sincerity when they see it. For this
		world, and for all worlds, what curse is so fatal? The
		heart lying dead, the eye cannot see. What intellect
		remains is merely the <em>vulpine</em> intellect. That a true
		<i>King</i> be sent them is of small use; they do not know
		him when sent. They say scornfully, Is this your King?
		The Hero wastes his heroic faculty in bootless contradiction
		from the unworthy; and can accomplish little.
		For himself he does accomplish a heroic life, which is
		much, which is all; but for the world he accomplishes
		comparatively nothing. The wild rude Sincerity, direct
		from Nature, is not glib in answering from the witness-box;
		in your small-debt <em>pie-powder</em> court, he is scouted
		as a counterfeit. The vulpine intellect &#8216;detects&#8217; him.
		For being a man worth any thousand men, the response,
		your Knox, your Cromwell gets, is an argument for two
		centuries, whether he was a man at all. God&#8217;s greatest
		gift to this Earth is sneeringly flung away. The miraculous
		talisman is a paltry plated coin, not fit to pass in
		the shops as a common guinea.</p>

		<p>Lamentable this! I say, this must be remedied.
		Till this be remedied in some measure, there is nothing
		remedied. &#8216;Detect quacks&#8217;? Yes do, for Heaven&#8217;s
		sake; but know withal the men that are to be trusted!
		Till we know that, what is all our knowledge; how
		shall we even so much as &#8216;detect&#8217;? For the vulpine
		sharpness, which considers itself to be knowledge, and
		&#8216;detects&#8217; in that fashion, is far mistaken. Dupes
		indeed are many: but, of all <em>dupes</em>, there is none so
		fatally situated as he who lives in undue terror of being
		duped. The world does exist; the world has truth in
		it or it would not exist! First recognise what is true,
		we shall <em>then</em> discern what is false; and properly never
		till then.</p>

		<p>&#8216;Know the men that are to be trusted:&#8217; alas, this
		is yet, in these days, very far from us. The sincere
		alone can recognise sincerity. Not a Hero only is
		needed, but a world fit for him; a world not of <i>Valets</i>;&#8212;the
		Hero comes almost in vain to it otherwise! Yes,
		it is far from us: but it must come; thank God, it is
		visibly coming. Till it do come, what have we? Ballot-boxes,
		suffrages, French Revolutions:&#8212;if we are as
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page442" name="page442"></a>442</span>Valets, and do not know the Hero when we see him,
		what good are all these? A heroic Cromwell comes;
		and for a hundred-and-fifty years he cannot have a vote
		from us. Why, the insincere, unbelieving world is the
		<em>natural property</em> of the Quack, and of the Father of
		quacks and quackeries! Misery, confusion, unveracity
		are alone possible there. By ballot-boxes we alter the
		<em>figure</em> of our Quack; but the substance of him continues.
		The Valet-World <em>has</em> to be governed by the
		Sham-Hero, by the King merely <em>dressed</em> in King-gear.
		It is his; he is its! In brief, one of two things: We
		shall either learn to know a Hero, a true Governor and
		Captain, somewhat better, when we see him; or else
		go on to be forever governed by the Unheroic;&#8212;had we
		ballot-boxes clattering at every street-corner, there were
		no remedy in these.</p>

		<p>Poor Cromwell,&#8212;great Cromwell! The inarticulate
		Prophet; Prophet who could not <em>speak</em>. Rude, confused,
		struggling to utter himself, with his savage
		depth, with his wild sincerity; and he looked so strange,
		among the elegant Euphemisms, dainty little Falklands,
		didactic Chillingworths, diplomatic Clarendons!
		Consider him. An outer hull of chaotic confusion,
		visions of the Devil, nervous dreams, almost semi-madness;
		and yet such a clear determinate man&#8217;s-energy
		working in the heart of that. A kind of chaotic man.
		The ray as of pure starlight and fire, working in such
		an element of boundless hypochondria, <em>un</em>formed black
		of darkness! And yet withal this hypochondria, what
		was it but the very greatness of the man? The depth
		and tenderness of his wild affections: the quantity of
		<em>sympathy</em> he had with things,&#8212;the quantity of insight
		he would yet get into the heart of things, the mastery
		he would yet get over things: this was his hypochondria.
		The man&#8217;s misery, as man&#8217;s misery always does,
		came of his greatness. Samuel Johnson too is that
		kind of man. Sorrow-stricken, half-distracted; the
		wide element of mournful <em>black</em> enveloping him,&#8212;wide
		as the world. It is the character of a prophetic man;
		a man with his whole soul <em>seeing</em>, and struggling to see.</p>

		<p>On this ground, too, I explain to myself Cromwell&#8217;s
		reputed confusion of speech. To himself the internal
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page443" name="page443"></a>443</span>meaning was sun-clear; but the material with which
		he was to clothe it in utterance was not there. He had
		<em>lived</em> silent; a great unnamed sea of Thought round
		him all his days; and in his way of life little call to
		attempt <em>naming</em> or uttering that. With his sharp
		power of vision, resolute power of action, I doubt not
		he could have learned to write Books withal, and speak
		fluently enough:&#8212;he did harder things than writing of
		Books. This kind of man is precisely he who is fit
		for doing manfully all things you will set him on doing.
		Intellect is not speaking and logicising; it is seeing
		and ascertaining. Virtue, <i>Vir-tus</i>, manhood, <em>hero</em>-hood,
		is not fair-spoken immaculate regularity; it is
		first of all, what the Germans well name it, <i>Tugend</i>
		(<i>Taugend</i>, <em>dow</em>-ing or <em>Dough</em>-tiness), Courage and
		the Faculty to <em>do</em>. This basis of the matter Cromwell
		had in him.</p>

		<p>One understands moreover how, though he could not
		speak in Parliament, he might <em>preach</em>, rhapsodic preaching;
		above all, how he might be great in extempore
		prayer. These are the free outpouring utterances of
		what is in the heart: method is not required in them;
		warmth, depth, sincerity are all that is required. Cromwell&#8217;s
		habit of prayer is a notable feature of him. All
		his great enterprises were commenced with prayer. In
		dark inextricable-looking difficulties, his Officers and
		he used to assemble, and pray alternately, for hours, for
		days, till some definite resolution rose among them,
		some &#8216;door of hope,&#8217; as they would name it, disclosed
		itself. Consider that. In tears, in fervent prayers,
		and cries to the great God, to have pity on them, to
		make His light shine before them. They, armed
		Soldiers of Christ, as they felt themselves to be; a
		little band of Christian Brothers, who had drawn the
		sword against a great black devouring world not Christian,
		but Mammonish, Devilish,&#8212;they cried to God in
		their straits, in their extreme need, not to forsake the
		Cause that was His. The light which now rose upon
		them,&#8212;how could a human soul, by any means at all,
		get better light? Was not the purpose so formed like
		to be precisely the best, wisest, the one to be followed
		without hesitation any more? To them it was as the
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page444" name="page444"></a>444</span>shining of Heaven&#8217;s own Splendour in the waste-howling
		darkness; the Pillar of Fire by night, that was
		to guide them on their desolate perilous way. <em>Was</em> it
		not such? Can a man&#8217;s soul, to this hour, get guidance
		by any other method than intrinsically by that
		same,&#8212;devout prostration of the earnest struggling
		soul before the Highest, the Giver of all Light; be such
		<em>prayer</em> a spoken, articulate, or be it a voiceless, inarticulate
		one? There is no other method. &#8216;Hypocrisy&#8217;?
		One begins to be weary of all that. They
		who call it so, have no right to speak on such matters.
		They never formed a purpose, what one can call a purpose.
		They went about balancing expediences, plausibilities;
		gathering votes, advices; they never were
		alone with the <em>truth</em> of a thing at all.&#8212;Cromwell&#8217;s
		prayers were likely to be &#8216;eloquent,&#8217; and much more
		than that. His was the heart of a man who <em>could</em>
		pray.</p>

		<p>But indeed his actual Speeches, I apprehend, were
		not nearly so ineloquent, incondite, as they look. We
		find he was, what all speakers aim to be, an impressive
		speaker, even in Parliament; one who, from the first,
		had weight. With that rude passionate voice of his,
		he was always understood to <em>mean</em> something, and men
		wished to know what. He disregarded eloquence, nay
		despised and disliked it; spoke always without premeditation
		of the words he was to use. The Reporters,
		too, in those days seem to have been singularly candid;
		and to have given the Printer precisely what they found
		on their own notepaper. And withal, what a strange
		proof is it of Cromwell&#8217;s being the premeditative ever-calculating
		hypocrite, acting a play before the world,
		That to the last he took no more charge of his
		Speeches! How came he not to study his words a
		little, before flinging them out to the public? If the
		words were true words, they could be left to shift for
		themselves.</p>

		<p>But with regard to Cromwell&#8217;s &#8216;lying,&#8217; we will make
		one remark. This, I suppose, or something like this,
		to have been the nature of it. All parties found themselves
		deceived in him; each party understood him to
		be meaning <em>this</em>, heard him even say so, and behold he
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page445" name="page445"></a>445</span>turns-out to have been meaning <em>that</em>! He was, cry
		they, the chief of liars. But now, intrinsically, is not
		all this the inevitable fortune, not of a false man in
		such times, but simply of a superior man? Such a
		man must have <em>reticences</em> in him. If he walk wearing
		his heart upon his sleeve for daws to peck at, his
		journey will not extend far! There is no use for any
		man&#8217;s taking-up his abode in a house built of glass.
		A man always is to be himself the judge how much of
		his mind he will show to other men; even to those he
		would have work along with him. There are impertinent
		inquiries made: your rule is, to leave the inquirer
		<em>un</em>informed on that matter; not, if you can help it,
		<em>mis</em>informed; but precisely as dark as he was! This,
		could one hit the right phrase of response, is what the
		wise and faithful man would aim to answer in such a
		case.</p>

		<p>Cromwell, no doubt of it, spoke often in the dialect
		of small subaltern parties; uttered to them a <em>part</em> of
		his mind. Each little party thought him all its own.
		Hence their rage, one and all, to find him not of their
		party, but of his own party! Was it his blame? At
		all seasons of his history he must have felt, among
		such people, how, if he explained to them the deeper
		insight he had, they must either have shuddered aghast
		at it, or believing it, their own little compact hypothesis
		must have gone wholly to wreck. They could not have
		worked in his province any more; nay perhaps they
		could not now have worked in their own province. It
		is the inevitable position of a great man among small
		men. Small men, most active, useful, are to be seen
		everywhere, whose whole activity depends on some conviction
		which to you is palpably a limited one; imperfect,
		what we call an <em>error</em>. But would it be a kindness
		always, is it a duty always or often, to disturb
		them in that? Many a man, doing loud work in the
		world, stands only on some thin traditionality, conventionality;
		to him indubitable, to you incredible: break
		that beneath him, he sinks to endless depths! &#8220;I might
		have my hand full of truth,&#8221; said Fontenelle, &#8220;and
		open only my little finger.&#8221;</p>

		<p>And if this be the fact even in matters of doctrine,
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page446" name="page446"></a>446</span>how much more in all departments of practice! He
		that cannot withal <em>keep his mind to himself</em> cannot
		practise any considerable thing whatever. And we call
		it &#8216;dissimulation,&#8217; all this? What would you think of
		calling the general of an army a dissembler because he
		did not tell every corporal and private soldier, who
		pleased to put the question, what his thoughts were
		about everything?&#8212;Cromwell, I should rather say,
		managed all this in a manner we must admire for its
		perfection. An endless vortex of such questioning &#8216;corporals&#8217;
		rolled confusedly round him through his whole
		course; whom he did answer. It must have been as a
		great true-seeing man that he managed this too. Not
		one proved falsehood, as I said; not one! Of what
		man that ever wound himself through such a coil of
		things will you say so much?&#8212;</p>

		<p class="post_thoughtbreak">But in fact there are two errors, widely prevalent,
		which pervert to the very basis our judgments formed
		about such men as Cromwell; about their &#8216;ambition,&#8217;
		&#8216;falsity,&#8217; and such-like. The first is what I might call
		substituting the <em>goal</em> of their career for the course and
		starting point of it. The vulgar Historian of a Cromwell
		fancies that he had determined on being Protector
		of England, at the time when he was ploughing the
		marsh lands of Cambridgeshire. His career lay all
		mapped-out: a program of the whole drama; which he
		then step by step dramatically unfolded, with all manner
		of cunning, deceptive dramaturgy, as he went on,&#8212;the
		hollow, scheming <span class="greek_text" title="Hypokritês">Ὑποκριτής</span>, or Play-actor that he was!
		This is a radical perversion; all but universal in such
		cases. And think for an instant how different the fact
		is! How much does one of us foresee of his own life?
		Short way ahead of us it is all dim; an <em>un</em>wound skein
		of possibilities, of apprehensions, attemptabilities,
		vague-looming hopes. This Cromwell had <em>not</em> his life
		lying all in that fashion of Program, which he needed
		then, with that unfathomable cunning of his, only to
		enact dramatically, scene after scene! Not so. We
		see it so; but to him it was in no measure so. What
		absurdities would fall-away of themselves, were this
		one undeniable fact kept honestly in view by History!
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page447" name="page447"></a>447</span>Historians indeed will tell you that they do keep it in
		view;&#8212;but look whether such is practically the fact!
		Vulgar History, as in this Cromwell&#8217;s case, omits it
		altogether; even the best kinds of History only remember
		it now and then. To remember it duly with rigorous
		perfection, as in the fact it <em>stood</em>, requires indeed
		a rare faculty; rare, nay impossible. A very Shakspeare
		for faculty; or more than Shakspeare; who could
		<em>enact</em> a brother-man&#8217;s biography, see with the brother-man&#8217;s
		eyes at all points of his course what things <em>he</em>
		saw; in short, <em>know</em> his course and him, as few &#8216;Historians&#8217;
		are like to do. Half or more of all the thick-plied
		perversions which distort our image of Cromwell,
		will disappear, if we honestly so much as try to represent
		them so; in sequence, as they <em>were</em>; not in the
		lump, as they are thrown-down before us.</p>

		<p>But a second error, which I think the generality
		commit, refers to this same &#8216;ambition&#8217; itself. We
		exaggerate the ambition of Great Men; we mistake
		what the nature of it is. Great Men are not ambitious
		in that sense; he is a small poor man that is ambitious
		so. Examine the man who lives in misery because he
		does not shine above other men; who goes about producing
		himself, pruriently anxious about his gifts and
		claims; struggling to force everybody, as it were
		begging everybody for God&#8217;s sake, to acknowledge him
		a great man, and set him over the heads of men! Such
		a creature is among the wretchedest sights seen under
		this sun. A <em>great</em> man? A poor morbid prurient
		empty man; fitter for the ward of a hospital, than for
		a throne among men. I advise you to keep-out of his
		way. He cannot walk on quiet paths; unless you will
		look at him, wonder at him, write paragraphs about
		him, he cannot live. It is the <em>emptiness</em> of the man,
		not his greatness. Because there is nothing in himself,
		he hungers and thirsts that you would find something
		in him. In good truth, I believe no great man, not so
		much as a genuine man who had health and real substance
		in him of whatever magnitude, was ever much
		tormented in this way.</p>

		<p>Your Cromwell, what good could it do him to be
		&#8216;noticed&#8217; by noisy crowds of people? God his Maker
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page448" name="page448"></a>448</span>already noticed him. He, Cromwell, was already
		there; no notice would make <em>him</em> other than he already
		was. Till his hair was grown gray; and Life from
		the downhill slope was all seen to be limited, not infinite
		but finite, and all a measurable matter <em>how</em> it went,&#8212;he
		had been content to plough the ground, and read his
		Bible. He in his old days could not support it any
		longer, without selling himself to Falsehood, that he
		might ride in gilt carriages to Whitehall, and have
		clerks with bundles of papers haunting him, &#8220;Decide
		this, decide that,&#8221; which in utmost sorrow of heart no
		man can perfectly decide! What could gilt carriages
		do for this man? From of old, was there not in his
		life a weight of meaning, a terror and a splendour as
		of Heaven itself? His existence there as man set him
		beyond the need of gilding. Death, Judgment and
		Eternity: these already lay as the background of whatsoever
		he thought or did. All his life lay begirt as in a
		sea of nameless Thoughts, which no speech of a mortal
		could name. God&#8217;s Word, as the Puritan prophets of
		that time had read it: this was great, and all else was
		little to him. To call such a man &#8216;ambitious,&#8217; to figure
		him as the prurient windbag described above, seems to
		me the poorest solecism. Such a man will say: &#8220;Keep
		your gilt carriages and huzzaing mobs, keep your red-tape
		clerks, your influentialities, your important businesses.
		Leave me alone, leave me alone; there is <i>too
		much of life</i> in me already!&#8221; Old Samuel Johnson, the
		greatest soul in England in his day, was not ambitious.
		&#8216;Corsica Boswell&#8217; flaunted at public shows with printed
		ribbons round his hat; but the great old Samuel stayed
		at home. The world-wide soul wrapt-up in its thoughts,
		in its sorrows;&#8212;what could paradings, and ribbons in
		the hat, do for it?</p>

		<p>Ah yes, I will say again: The great <em>silent</em> men!
		Looking round on the noisy inanity of the world, words
		with little meaning, actions with little worth, one loves
		to reflect on the great Empire of <i>Silence</i>. The noble
		silent men, scattered here and there, each in his department;
		silently thinking, silently working; whom no
		Morning Newspaper makes mention of! They are the
		salt of the Earth. A country that has none or few of
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page449" name="page449"></a>449</span>these is in a bad way. Like a forest which had no
		<em>roots</em>; which had all turned into leaves and boughs;&#8212;which
		must soon wither and be no forest. Woe for us
		if we had nothing but what we can <em>show</em>, or speak.
		Silence, the great Empire of Silence: higher than the
		stars; deeper than the Kingdoms of Death! It alone
		is great; all else is small.&#8212;I hope we English will long
		maintain our <i>grand talent pour le silence</i>. Let others
		that cannot do without standing on barrel-heads, to
		spout, and be seen of all the market-place, cultivate
		speech exclusively,&#8212;become a most green forest without
		roots! Solomon says, There is a time to speak; but
		also a time to keep silence. Of some great silent
		Samuel, not urged to writing, as old Samuel Johnson
		says he was, by <em>want of money</em>, and nothing other, one
		might ask, &#8220;Why do not you too get up and speak;
		promulgate your system, found your sect?&#8221; &#8220;Truly,&#8221;
		he will answer, &#8220;I am <em>continent</em> of my thought hitherto;
		happily I have yet had the ability to keep it in me,
		no compulsion strong enough to speak it. My &#8216;system&#8217;
		is not for promulgation first of all; it is for serving
		myself to live by. That is the great purpose of it to
		me. And then the &#8216;honour&#8217;? Alas, yes;&#8212;but as Cato
		said of the statue: So many statues in that Forum of
		yours, may it not be better if they ask, Where is Cato&#8217;s
		statue?&#8221;&#8212;</p>

		<p>But, now, by way of counterpoise to this of Silence,
		let me say that there are two kinds of ambition; one
		wholly blamable, the other laudable and inevitable.
		Nature has provided that the great silent Samuel shall
		not be silent too long. The selfish wish to shine over
		others, let it be accounted altogether poor and miserable.
		&#8216;Seekest thou great things, seek them not:&#8217; this is
		most true. And yet, I say, there is an irrepressible
		tendency in every man to develop himself according to
		the magnitude which Nature has made him of; to speak-out,
		to act-out, what Nature has laid in him. This is
		proper, fit, inevitable; nay it is a duty, and even the
		summary of duties for a man. The meaning of life
		here on earth might be defined as consisting in this: To
		unfold your <em>self</em>, to work what thing you have the
		faculty for. It is a necessity for the human being, the
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page450" name="page450"></a>450</span>first law of our existence. Coleridge beautifully remarks
		that the infant learns to <em>speak</em> by this necessity
		it feels.&#8212;We will say therefore: To decide about ambition,
		whether it is bad or not, you have two things
		to take into view. Not the coveting of the place alone,
		but the fitness of the man for the place withal: that is the
		question. Perhaps the place was <em>his</em>; perhaps he had
		a natural right, and even obligation, to seek the place!
		Mirabeau&#8217;s ambition to be Prime Minister, how shall
		we blame it, if he were &#8216;the only man in France that
		could have done any good there&#8217;? Hopefuler perhaps
		had he not so clearly <em>felt</em> how much good he could do!
		But a poor Necker, who could do no good, and had even
		felt that he could do none, yet sitting broken-hearted
		because they had flung him out, and he was now quit
		of it, well might Gibbon mourn over him.&#8212;Nature, I
		say, has provided amply that the silent great man shall
		strive to speak withal; <em>too</em> amply, rather!</p>

		<p>Fancy, for example, you had revealed to the brave
		old Samuel Johnson, in his shrouded-up existence, that
		it was possible for him to do priceless divine work for
		his country and the whole world. That the perfect
		Heavenly Law might be made law on this earth; that
		the prayer he prayed daily, &#8216;Thy kingdom come,&#8217; was
		at length to be fulfilled! If you had convinced his
		judgment of this; that it was possible, practicable;
		that he the mournful silent Samuel was called to take
		a part in it! Would not the whole soul of the man have
		flamed up into a divine clearness, into noble utterance
		and determination to act; casting all sorrows and misgivings
		under his feet, counting all affliction and contradiction
		small,&#8212;the whole dark element of his existence
		blazing into articulate radiance of light and lightning?
		It were a true ambition this! And think now
		how it actually was with Cromwell. From of old, the
		sufferings of God&#8217;s Church, true zealous preachers of
		the truth flung into dungeons, whipt, set on pillories,
		their ears cropt off, God&#8217;s Gospel-cause trodden under
		foot of the unworthy: all this had lain heavy on his
		soul. Long years he had looked upon it, in silence, in
		prayer; seeing no remedy on Earth; trusting well that
		a remedy in Heaven&#8217;s goodness would come,&#8212;that such
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page451" name="page451"></a>451</span>a course was false, unjust, and could not last forever.
		And now behold the dawn of it; after twelve years
		silent waiting, all England stirs itself; there is to be
		once more a Parliament, the Right will get a voice for
		itself: inexpressible well-grounded hope has come again
		into the Earth. Was not such a Parliament worth
		being a member of? Cromwell threw down his ploughs
		and hastened thither.</p>

		<p>He spoke there,&#8212;rugged bursts of earnestness, of a
		self-seen truth, where we get a glimpse of them. He
		worked there; he fought and strove, like a strong true
		giant of a man, through cannon-tumult and all else,&#8212;on
		and on, till the Cause <em>triumphed</em>, its once so formidable
		enemies all swept from before it, and the dawn of
		hope had become clear light of victory and certainty.
		That <em>he</em> stood there as the strongest soul of England,
		the undisputed Hero of all England,&#8212;what of this? It
		was possible that the law of Christ&#8217;s Gospel could now
		establish itself in the world! The Theocracy which
		John Knox in his pulpit might dream of as a &#8216;devout
		imagination,&#8217; this practical man, experienced in the
		whole chaos of most rough practice, dared to consider
		as capable of being <em>realised</em>. Those that were highest
		in Christ&#8217;s Church, the devoutest wisest men, were to
		rule the land: in some considerable degree, it might
		be so and should be so. Was it not <em>true</em>, God&#8217;s truth?
		And if <em>true</em>, was it not then the very thing to do? The
		strongest practical intellect in England dared to answer,
		Yes! This I call a noble true purpose; is it not, In
		its own dialect, the noblest that could enter into the
		heart of Statesman or man? For a Knox to take it
		up was something; but for a Cromwell, with his great
		sound sense and experience of what our world <em>was</em>,&#8212;History,
		I think, shows it only this once in such a
		degree. I account it the culminating point of Protestantism;
		the most heroic phasis that &#8216;Faith in the Bible&#8217;
		was appointed to exhibit here below. Fancy it: that
		it were made manifest to one of us, how we could make
		the Right supremely victorious over Wrong, and all
		that we had longed and prayed for, as the highest good
		to England and all lands, an attainable fact!</p>

		<p>Well, I must say, the <em>vulpine</em> intellect, with its knowingness,
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page452" name="page452"></a>452</span>its alertness and expertness in &#8216;detecting
		hypocrites,&#8217; seems to me a rather sorry business. We
		have had one such Statesman in England; one man,
		that I can get sight of, who ever had in the heart of
		him any such purpose at all. One man, in the course
		of fifteen hundred years; and this was his welcome.
		He had adherents by the hundred or the ten; opponents
		by the million. Had England rallied all round him,&#8212;why,
		then, England might have been a <em>Christian</em> land!
		As it is, vulpine knowingness sits yet at its hopeless
		problem, &#8216;Given a world of Knaves, to educe an
		Honesty from their united action;&#8217;&#8212;how cumbrous a
		problem, you may see in Chancery Law-Courts, and
		some other places! Till at length, by Heaven&#8217;s just
		anger, but also by Heaven&#8217;s great grace, the matter
		begins to stagnate; and this problem is becoming to all
		men a <em>palpably</em> hopeless one.&#8212;</p>

		<p class="post_thoughtbreak">But with regard to Cromwell and his purposes: Hume
		and a multitude following him, come upon me here with
		an admission that Cromwell <em>was</em> sincere at first; a
		sincere &#8216;Fanatic&#8217; at first, but gradually became a
		&#8216;Hypocrite&#8217; as things opened round him. This of the
		Fanatic-Hypocrite is Hume&#8217;s theory of it; extensively
		applied since,&#8212;to Mahomet and many others. Think
		of it seriously, you will find something in it; not much,
		not all, very far from all. Sincere hero hearts do not
		sink in this miserable manner. The Sun flings forth
		impurities, gets balefully incrusted with spots; but it
		does not quench itself, and become no Sun at all, but a
		mass of Darkness! I will venture to say that such
		never befell a great, deep Cromwell; I think, never.
		Nature&#8217;s own lion-hearted Son! Antæus-like, his
		strength is got by <em>touching the Earth</em>, his Mother; lift
		him up from the Earth, lift him up into Hypocrisy, Inanity,
		his strength is gone. We will not assert that
		Cromwell was an immaculate man; that he fell into no
		faults, no insincerities among the rest. He was no
		dilettante professor of &#8216;perfections,&#8217; &#8216;immaculate conducts.&#8217;
		He was a rugged Orson, rending his rough
		way through actual true <em>work</em>,&#8212;doubtless with many
		a <em>fall</em> therein. Insincerities, faults, very many faults
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page453" name="page453"></a>453</span>daily and hourly: it was too well known to him; known
		to God and him! The Sun was dimmed many a time;
		but the Sun had not himself grown a Dimness. Cromwell&#8217;s
		last words, as he lay waiting for death, are those
		of a Christian heroic man. Broken prayers to God, that
		He would judge him and this Cause, He since man
		could not, in justice yet in pity. They are most touching
		words. He breathed out his wild great soul, its
		toils and sins all ended now, into the presence of his
		Maker, in this manner.</p>

		<p>I, for one, will not call the man a Hypocrite! Hypocrite,
		mummer, the life of him a mere theatricality;
		empty barren quack, hungry for the shouts of mobs?
		The man had made obscurity do very well for him till
		his head was gray; and now he <em>was</em>, there as he stood
		recognised unblamed, the virtual King of England.
		Cannot a man do without King&#8217;s Coaches and Cloaks?
		Is it such a blessedness to have clerks forever pestering
		you with bundles of papers in red tape? A simple
		Diocletian prefers planting of cabbages; a George
		Washington, no very immeasurable man, does the like.
		One would say, it is what any genuine man could do;
		and would do. The instant his real work were out in
		the matter of Kingship,&#8212;away with it!</p>

		<p>Let us remark, meanwhile, how indispensable everywhere
		a <i>King</i> is, in all movements of men. It is
		strikingly shown, in this very War, what becomes of
		men when they cannot find a Chief Man, and their
		enemies can. The Scotch Nation was all but unanimous
		in Puritanism; zealous and of one mind about it, as
		in this English end of the Island was far from being
		the case. But there was no great Cromwell among
		them; poor tremulous, hesitating, diplomatic Argyles
		and suchlike; none of them had a heart true enough
		for the truth, or durst commit himself to the truth.
		They had no leader; and the scattered Cavalier party
		in that country had one: Montrose, the noblest of all
		the Cavaliers; an accomplished, gallant-hearted,
		splendid man; what one may call the Hero-Cavalier.
		Well, look at it; on the one hand subjects without a
		King; on the other a King without subjects! The
		subjects without King can do nothing; the subjectless
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page454" name="page454"></a>454</span>King can do something. This Montrose, with a handful
		of Irish or Highland savages, few of them so much
		as guns in their hands, dashes at the drilled Puritan
		armies like a wild whirlwind; sweeps them, time after
		time, some five times over, from the field before him.
		He was at one period, for a short while, master of all
		Scotland. One man; but he was a man: a million
		zealous men, but <em>without</em> the one; they against him
		were powerless! Perhaps of all the persons in that
		Puritan struggle, from first to last, the single indispensable
		one was verily Cromwell. To see and dare,
		and decide; to be a fixed pillar in the welter of uncertainty;&#8212;a
		King among them, whether they called him
		so or not.</p>

		<p class="post_thoughtbreak">Precisely here, however, lies the rub for Cromwell.
		His other proceedings have all found advocates, and
		stand generally justified; but this dismissal of the Rump
		Parliament and assumption of the Protectorship, is
		what no one can pardon him. He had fairly grown to
		be King in England; Chief Man of the victorious party
		in England: but it seems he could not do without the
		King&#8217;s Cloak, and sold himself to perdition in order
		to get it. Let us see a little how this was.</p>

		<p>England, Scotland, Ireland, all lying now subdued
		at the feet of the Puritan Parliament, the practical question
		arose, What was to be done with it? How will
		you govern these Nations, which Providence in a
		wondrous way has given-up to your disposal? Clearly
		those hundred surviving members of the Long Parliament,
		who sit there as supreme authority, cannot continue
		for ever to sit. What <em>is</em> to be done?&#8212;It was a
		question which theoretical constitution-builders may find
		easy to answer; but to Cromwell, looking there into
		the real practical facts of it, there could be none more
		complicated. He asked of the Parliament, What it
		was they would decide upon? It was for the Parliament
		to say. Yet the Soldiers too, however contrary
		to Formula, they who had purchased this victory with
		their blood, it seemed to them that they also should
		have something to say in it! We will not &#8220;For all
		our fighting have nothing but a little piece of paper.&#8221;
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page455" name="page455"></a>455</span>We understand that the Law of God&#8217;s Gospel, to which
		He through us has given the victory, shall establish
		itself, or try to establish itself, in this land!</p>

		<p>For three years, Cromwell says, this question had
		been sounded in the ears of the Parliament. They
		could make no answer; nothing but talk, talk. Perhaps
		it lies in the nature of parliamentary bodies;
		perhaps no Parliament could in such case make any
		answer but even that of talk, talk! Nevertheless the
		question must and shall be answered. You sixty men
		there, becoming fast odious, even despicable, to the
		whole nation, whom the nation already calls Rump
		Parliament, <em>you</em> cannot continue to sit there: who or
		what then is to follow? &#8216;Free Parliament,&#8217; right of
		Election, Constitutional Formulas of one sort or the
		other,&#8212;the thing is a hungry Fact coming on us, which
		we must answer or be devoured by it! And who
		are you that prate of Constitutional Formulas, rights
		of Parliament? You have had to kill your King, to
		make Pride&#8217;s Purges, to expel and banish by the law
		of the stronger whosoever would not let your Cause
		prosper: there are but fifty or three-score of you left
		there, debating in these days. Tell us what we
		shall do; not in the way of Formula, but of practicable
		Fact!</p>

		<p>How they did finally answer, remains obscure to this
		day. The diligent Godwin himself admits that he cannot
		make it out. The likeliest is, that this poor Parliament
		still would not, and indeed could not dissolve and
		disperse; that when it came to the point of actually
		dispersing, they again, for the tenth or twentieth time,
		adjourned it,&#8212;and Cromwell&#8217;s patience failed him.
		But we will take the favourablest hypothesis ever
		started for the Parliament; the favourablest, though I
		believe it is not the true one, but too favourable.</p>

		<p>According to this version: At the uttermost crisis,
		when Cromwell and his Officers were met on the one
		hand, and the fifty or sixty Rump Members on the
		other, it was suddenly told Cromwell that the Rump
		in its despair <em>was</em> answering in a very singular way;
		that in their splenetic envious despair, to keep-out the
		army at least, these men were hurrying through the
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page456" name="page456"></a>456</span>House a kind of Reform Bill,&#8212;Parliament to be chosen
		by the whole of England; equable electoral division
		into districts; free suffrage, and the rest of it! A
		very questionable, or indeed for <em>them</em> an unquestionable
		thing. Reform Bill, free suffrage of Englishmen?
		Why, the Royalists themselves, silenced indeed but
		not exterminated, perhaps out<em>number</em> us; the great
		numerical majority of England was always indifferent
		to our Cause, merely looked at it and submitted to it.
		It is in weight and force, not by counting of heads, that
		we are the majority! And now with your Formulas
		and Reform Bills, the whole matter, sorely won by our
		swords, shall again launch itself to sea; become a mere
		hope, and likelihood, <em>small</em> even as a likelihood? And
		it is not a likelihood; it is a certainty, which we have
		won, by God&#8217;s strength and our own right hands, and
		do now hold <em>here</em>. Cromwell walked down to these
		refractory Members; interrupted them in that rapid
		speed of their Reform Bill;&#8212;ordered them to begone,
		and talk there no more.&#8212;Can we not forgive him? Can
		we not understand him? John Milton, who looked on
		it all near at hand, could applaud him. The Reality
		had swept the Formulas away before it. I fancy, most
		men who were realities in England might see into the
		necessity of that.</p>

		<p>The strong daring man, therefore, has set all manner
		of Formulas and logical superficialities against him;
		has dared appeal to the genuine fact of this England,
		Whether it will support him or not? It is curious to
		see how he struggles to govern in some constitutional
		way; find some Parliament to support him; but cannot.
		His first Parliament, the one they call Barebones&#8217;s
		Parliament, is, so to speak, a <i>Convocation of the
		Notables</i>. From all quarters of England the leading
		Ministers and chief Puritan Officials nominate the men
		most distinguished by religious reputation, influence and
		attachment to the true Cause: these are assembled to
		shape-out a plan. They sanctioned what was past;
		shaped as they could what was to come. They were
		scornfully called <i>Barebones&#8217;s Parliament</i>, the man&#8217;s
		name, it seems, was not <i>Barebones</i>, but Barbone,&#8212;a
		good enough man. Nor was it a jest, their work; it
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page457" name="page457"></a>457</span>was a most serious reality,&#8212;a trial on the part of
		these Puritan Notables how far the Law of Christ could
		become the Law of this England. There were men
		of sense among them, men of some quality; men of
		deep piety I suppose the most of them were. They
		failed, it seems, and broke down, endeavouring to
		reform the Court of Chancery! They dissolved themselves,
		as incompetent; delivered-up their power again
		into the hands of the Lord-General Cromwell, to do with
		it what he liked and could.</p>

		<p>What <em>will</em> he do with it? The Lord-General Cromwell,
		&#8216;Commander-in Chief of all the Forces raised and
		to be raised;&#8217; he hereby sees himself, at this unexampled
		juncture, as it were the one available Authority
		left in England, nothing between England and utter
		Anarchy but him alone. Such is the undeniable Fact
		of his position and England&#8217;s, there and then. What
		will he do with it? After deliberation, he decides that
		he will <em>accept</em> it; will formally, with public solemnity,
		say and vow before God and men, &#8220;Yes, the Fact is
		so, and I will do the best I can with it!&#8221; Protectorship,
		Instrument of Government,&#8212;these are the external
		forms of the thing; worked-out and sanctioned as they
		could in the circumstances be, by the Judges, by the
		leading Official people, &#8216;Council of Officers and Persons
		of interest in the Nation:&#8217; and as for the thing itself,
		undeniably enough, at the pass matters had now come
		to, there <em>was</em> no alternative but Anarchy or that.
		Puritan England might accept it or not; but Puritan
		England was, in real truth, saved from suicide thereby!&#8212;I
		believe the Puritan People did, in an inarticulate,
		grumbling, yet on the whole grateful and real way,
		accept this anomalous act of Oliver&#8217;s; at least, he and
		they together made it good, and always better to the
		last. But in their Parliamentary <em>articulate</em> way, they
		had their difficulties, and never knew fully what to say to
		it!&#8212;</p>

		<p>Oliver&#8217;s second Parliament, properly his <em>first</em> regular
		Parliament, chosen by the rule laid-down in the Instrument
		of Government, did assemble, and worked;&#8212;but
		got, before long, into bottomless questions as to the
		Protector&#8217;s <em>right</em>, as to &#8216;usurpation,&#8217; and so forth; and
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page458" name="page458"></a>458</span>had at the earliest legal day to be dismissed. Cromwell&#8217;s
		concluding Speech to these men is a remarkable
		one. So likewise to his third Parliament, in similar
		rebuke for their pedantries and obstinacies. Most rude,
		chaotic, all these Speeches are; but most earnest-looking.
		You would say, it was a sincere helpless man;
		not used to <em>speak</em> the great inorganic thought of him,
		but to act it rather! A helplessness of utterance, in
		such bursting fulness of meaning. He talks much about
		&#8216;births of Providence:&#8217; All these changes, so many
		victories and events, were not forethoughts, and
		theatrical contrivances of men, of <em>me</em> or of men; it
		is blind blasphemers that will persist in calling them so!
		He insists with a heavy sulphurous wrathful emphasis
		on this. As he well might. As if a Cromwell in that
		dark huge game he had been playing, the world wholly
		thrown into chaos round him, had <em>foreseen</em> it all, and
		played it all off like a precontrived puppetshow by wood
		and wire! These things were foreseen by no man, he
		says; no man could tell what a day would bring forth:
		they were &#8216;births of Providence,&#8217; God&#8217;s finger guided
		us on, and we came at last to clear height of victory,
		God&#8217;s Cause triumphant in these Nations; and you
		as a Parliament could assemble together, and say in
		what manner all this could be <em>organised</em>, reduced into
		rational feasibility among the affairs of men. You were
		to help with your wise counsel in doing that. &#8220;You
		have had such an opportunity as no Parliament in
		England ever had.&#8221; Christ&#8217;s Law, the Right and
		True, was to be in some measure made the Law of this
		land. In place of that, you have got into your idle
		pedantries, constitutionalities, bottomless cavillings and
		questionings about written laws for <em>my</em> coming here;&#8212;and
		would send the whole matter into Chaos again,
		because I have no Notary&#8217;s parchment, but only God&#8217;s
		voice from the battle-whirlwind, for being President
		among you! That opportunity is gone; and we know
		not when it will return. You have had your constitutional
		Logic; and Mammon&#8217;s Law, not Christ&#8217;s Law,
		rules yet in this land. &#8220;God be judge between you
		and me!&#8221; These are his final words to them: Take
		you your constitution-formulas in your hand; and I
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page459" name="page459"></a>459</span>my <em>in</em>formal struggles, purposes, realities and acts;
		and &#8220;God be judge between you and me!&#8221;&#8212;</p>

		<p>We said above what shapeless, involved chaotic things
		the printed Speeches of Cromwell are. <em>Wilfully</em> ambiguous,
		unintelligible, say the most: a hypocrite
		shrouding himself in confused Jesuitic jargon! To me
		they do not seem so. I will say rather, they afforded
		the first glimpses I could ever get into the reality of this
		Cromwell, nay into the possibility of him. Try to believe
		that he means something, search lovingly what
		that may be: you will find a real <em>speech</em> lying imprisoned
		in these broken rude tortuous utterances; a
		meaning in the great heart of this inarticulate man!
		You will, for the first time, begin to see that he was
		a man; not an enigmatic chimera, unintelligible to
		you, incredible to you. The Histories and Biographies
		written of this Cromwell, written in shallow sceptical
		generations that could not know or conceive of a deep
		believing man, are far more <em>obscure</em> than Cromwell&#8217;s
		Speeches. You look through them only into the infinite
		vague of Black and the Inane. &#8216;Heats and Jealousies,&#8217;
		says Lord Clarendon himself: &#8216;heats and jealousies,&#8217;
		mere crabbed whims, theories and crochets; these induced
		slow sober quiet Englishmen to lay down their
		ploughs and work; and fly into red fury of confused
		war against the best-conditioned of Kings! <em>Try</em> if you
		can find that true. Scepticism writing about Belief may
		have great gifts; but it is really <i>ultra vires</i> there. It
		is Blindness laying-down the Laws of Optics.&#8212;</p>

		<p>Cromwell&#8217;s third Parliament split on the same rock
		as his second. Ever the constitutional Formula: How
		came <em>you</em> there? Show us some Notary parchment!
		Blind pedants:&#8212;&#8220;Why, surely the same power which
		makes you a Parliament, that, and something more,
		made me a Protector!&#8221; If my Protectorship is nothing,
		what in the name of wonder is your Parliamenteership,
		a reflex and creation of that?&#8212;</p>

		<p>Parliaments having failed, there remained nothing
		but the way of Despotism. Military Dictators, each
		with his district, to <em>coerce</em> the Royalists and other gainsayers,
		to govern them, if not by act of Parliament,
		then by the sword. Formula shall <em>not</em> carry it, while
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page460" name="page460"></a>460</span>the Reality is here! I will go on, protecting oppressed
		Protestants abroad, appointing just judges, wise
		managers, at home, cherishing true Gospel ministers;
		doing the best I can to make England a Christian England,
		greater than old Rome, the Queen of Protestant
		Christianity; I, since you will not help me; I while
		God leaves me life!&#8212;Why did he not give it up; retire
		into obscurity again, since the Law would not acknowledge
		him? cry several. That is where they mistake.
		For him there was no giving of it up! Prime Ministers
		have governed countries, Pitt, Pombal, Choiseul; and
		their word was a law while it held: but this Prime
		Minister was one that <em>could not get resigned</em>. Let him
		once resign, Charles Stuart and the Cavaliers waited
		to kill him; to kill the Cause <em>and</em> him. Once embarked,
		there is no retreat, no return. This Prime Minister
		could <em>retire</em> nowhither except into his tomb.</p>

		<p>One is sorry for Cromwell in his old days. His
		complaint is incessant of the heavy burden Providence
		has laid on him. Heavy; which he must bear till
		death. Old Colonel Hutchinson, as his wife relates it,
		Hutchinson, his old battle-mate, coming to see him on
		some indispensable business, much against his will,&#8212;Cromwell
		&#8216;follows him to the door,&#8217; in a most fraternal,
		domestic, conciliatory style; begs that he would be
		reconciled to him, his old brother in arms; says how
		much it grieves him to be misunderstood, deserted by
		true fellow-soldiers, dear to him from of old: the rigorous
		Hutchinson, cased in his republican formula, sullenly
		goes his way.&#8212;And the man&#8217;s head now white; his
		strong arm growing weary with its long work! I think
		always too of his poor Mother, now very old, living in
		that Palace of his; a right brave woman: as indeed
		they lived all an honest God-fearing Household there:
		if she heard a shot go off, she thought it was her son
		killed. He had to come to her at least once a day,
		that she might see with her own eyes that he was yet
		living. The poor old Mother!&#8212;&#8212;What had this man
		gained; what had he gained? He had a life of sore
		strife and toil, to his last day. Fame, ambition, place in
		History? His dead body was hung in chains; his
		&#8216;place in History,&#8217;&#8212;place in History forsooth!&#8212;has
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page461" name="page461"></a>461</span>been a place of ignominy, accusation, blackness and disgrace;
		and here, this day, who knows if it is not rash
		in me to be among the first that ever ventured to pronounce
		him not a knave and a liar, but a genuinely
		honest man! Peace to him. Did he not, in spite of
		all, accomplish much for us? <em>We</em> walk smoothly over
		his great rough heroic life; step-over his body sunk
		in the ditch there. We need not <em>spurn</em> it, as we step
		on it!&#8212;Let the Hero rest. It was not to <em>men&#8217;s</em> judgment
		that he appealed; nor have men judged him very
		well.</p>

		<p class="post_thoughtbreak">Precisely a century and a year after this of Puritanism
		had got itself hushed-up into decent composure,
		and its results made smooth in 1688, there broke-out a
		far deeper explosion, much more difficult to hush-up,
		known to all mortals, and like to be long known, by
		the name of French Revolution. It is properly the third
		and final act of Protestantism; the explosive confused
		return of Mankind to Reality and Fact, now that they
		were perishing of Semblance and Sham. We call our
		English Puritanism the second act: &#8220;Well then, the
		Bible is true; let us go by the Bible!&#8221; &#8220;In Church,&#8221;
		said Luther; &#8220;In Church and State,&#8221; said Cromwell,
		&#8220;let us go by what actually is God&#8217;s Truth.&#8221; Men
		have to return to reality; they cannot live on semblance.
		The French Revolution, or third act, we may well call
		the final one; for lower than that savage <i>Sansculottism</i>
		men cannot go. They stand there on the nakedest
		haggard Fact, undeniable in all seasons and circumstances;
		and may and must begin again confidently to
		build-up from that. The French explosion, like the
		English one, got its King,&#8212;who had no Notary parchment
		to show for himself. We have still to glance for
		a moment at Napoleon, our second modern King.</p>

		<p>Napoleon does by no means seem to me so great a
		man as Cromwell. His enormous victories which
		reached over all Europe, while Cromwell abode mainly
		in our little England, are but as the high <em>stilts</em> on which
		the man is seen standing; the stature of the man is
		not altered thereby. I find in him no such <em>sincerity</em> as
		In Cromwell; only a far inferior sort. No silent walking,
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page462" name="page462"></a>462</span>through long years, with the Awful Unnamable of
		this Universe; &#8216;walking with God,&#8217; as he called it;
		and faith and strength in that alone: <em>latent</em> thought
		and valour, content to lie latent, then burst out as in
		blaze of Heaven&#8217;s lightning! Napoleon lived in an age
		when God was no longer believed; the meaning of all
		Silence, Latency, was thought to be Nonentity: he
		had to begin not out of the Puritan Bible, but out of
		poor Sceptical <i>Encyclopédies</i>. This was the length the
		man carried it. Meritorious to get so far. His compact,
		prompt, everyway articulate character is in itself
		perhaps small, compared with our great chaotic inarticulate
		Cromwell&#8217;s. Instead of &#8216;<em>dumb</em> Prophet
		struggling to speak,&#8217; we have a portentous mixture of
		the Quack withal! Hume&#8217;s notion of the Fanatic-Hypocrite,
		with such truth as it has, will apply much
		better to Napoleon than it did to Cromwell, to Mahomet
		or the like,&#8212;where indeed taken strictly it has hardly
		any truth at all. An element of blamable ambition
		shows itself, from the first, in this man; gets the
		victory over him at last, and involves him and his work
		in ruin.</p>

		<p>&#8216;False as a bulletin&#8217; became a proverb in Napoleon&#8217;s
		time. He makes what excuse he could for it: that it
		was necessary to mislead the enemy, to keep up his
		own men&#8217;s courage, and so forth. On the whole, there
		are no excuses. A man in no case has liberty to tell
		lies. It had been, in the long-run, <em>better</em> for Napoleon
		too if he had not told any. In fact, if a man have any
		purpose reaching beyond the hour and day, meant to
		be found extant <em>next</em> day, what good can it ever be to
		promulgate lies? The lies are found-out; ruinous
		penalty is exacted for them. No man will believe the
		liar next time even when he speaks truth, when it is of
		the last importance that he be believed. The old cry
		of wolf!&#8212;A Lie is <em>no</em>-thing; you cannot of nothing
		make something; you make <em>nothing</em> at last, and lose
		your labour into the bargain.</p>

		<p>Yet Napoleon <em>had</em> a sincerity; we are to distinguish
		between what is superficial and what is fundamental in
		insincerity. Across these outer man[oe]uvrings and
		quackeries of his, which were many and most blamable,
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page463" name="page463"></a>463</span>let us discern withal that the man had a certain instinctive
		ineradicable feeling for reality; and did base himself
		upon fact, so long as he had any basis. He has
		an instinct of Nature better than his culture was. His
		<i>savans</i>, Bourrienne tells us, in that voyage to Egypt
		were one evening busily occupied arguing that there
		could be no God. They had proved it, to their satisfaction,
		by all manner of logic. Napoleon looking up
		into the stars, answers, &#8220;Very ingenious, Messieurs:
		but <em>who made</em> all that?&#8221; The Atheistic logic runs-off
		from him like water; the great Fact stares him in the
		face: &#8220;Who made all that?&#8221; So too in Practice: he,
		as every man that can be great, or have victory in this
		world, sees, through all entanglements, the practical
		heart of the matter; drives straight towards that.
		When the steward of his Tuileries Palace was exhibiting
		the new upholstery, with praises, and demonstration
		how glorious it was, and how cheap withal, Napoleon,
		making little answer, asked for a pair of scissors,
		clipt one of the gold tassels from a window-curtain, put
		it in his pocket, and walked on. Some days afterwards,
		he produced it at the right moment, to the horror
		of his upholstery functionary; it was not gold but
		tinsel! In Saint Helena, it is notable how he still, to
		his last days, insists on the practical, the real. &#8220;Why
		talk and complain; above all, why quarrel with one
		another? There is no <em>result</em> in it; it comes to nothing
		that one can <em>do</em>. Say nothing, if one can do nothing!&#8221;
		He speaks often so, to his poor discontented followers;
		he is like a piece of silent strength in the middle of their
		morbid querulousness there.</p>

		<p>And accordingly was there not what we can call a
		<em>faith</em> in him, genuine so far as it went? That this new
		enormous Democracy asserting itself here in the French
		Revolution is an insuppressible Fact, which the whole
		world, with its old forces and institutions cannot put
		down; this was a true insight of his, and took his conscience
		and enthusiasm along with it,&#8212;a <em>faith</em>. And
		did he not interpret the dim purport of it well? &#8216;<i>La
		carrière ouverte aux talens</i>, The implements to him
		who can handle them:&#8217; this actually is the truth, and
		even the whole truth; it includes whatever the French
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page464" name="page464"></a>464</span>Revolution, or any Revolution, could mean. Napoleon,
		in his first period, was a true Democrat. And yet by
		the nature of him, fostered too by his military trade, he
		knew that Democracy, if it were a true thing at all
		could not be an anarchy: the man had a heart-hatred
		for anarchy. On that Twentieth of June (1792), Bourrienne
		and he sat in a coffee-house, as the mob rolled
		by: Napoleon expresses the deepest contempt for
		persons in authority that they do not restrain this rabble.
		On the Tenth of August he wonders why there is no
		man to command these poor Swiss; they would conquer
		if there were. Such a faith in Democracy, yet hatred
		of Anarchy, it is that carries Napoleon through all his
		great work. Through his brilliant Italian Campaigns,
		onwards to the Peace of Leoben, one would say, his
		inspiration is: &#8216;Triumph to the French Revolution;
		assertion of it against these Austrian Simulacra that
		pretend to call it a Simulacrum!&#8217; Withal, however, he
		feels, and has a right to feel, how necessary a strong
		Authority is; how the Revolution cannot prosper or
		last without such. To bridle-in that great devouring,
		self-devouring French Revolution; to <em>tame</em> it, so that
		its intrinsic purpose can be made good, that it may
		become <em>organic</em>, and be able to live among other organisms
		and <em>formed</em> things, not as a wasting destruction
		alone: is not this still what he partly aimed at, as the
		true purport of his life; nay what he actually managed
		to do? Through Wagrams, Austerlitzes; triumph after
		triumph,&#8212;he triumphed so far. There was an eye to
		see in this man, a soul to dare and do. He rose naturally
		to be the King. All men saw that he <em>was</em> such. The
		common soldiers used to say on the march: &#8220;These
		babbling <i>Avocats</i>, up at Paris; all talk and no work!
		What wonder it runs all wrong? We shall have to go
		and put our <i>Petit Caporal</i> there!&#8221; They went, and
		put him there; they and France at large. Chief-consulship,
		Emperorship, victory over Europe;&#8212;till the
		poor Lieutenant of <i>La Fère</i>, not unnaturally, might
		seem to himself the greatest of all men that had been
		in the world for some ages.</p>

		<p>But at this point, I think, the fatal charlatan-element
		got the upper hand. He apostatised from his old Faith
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page465" name="page465"></a>465</span>in Facts: took to believing in Semblances; strove to
		connect himself with Austrian Dynasties, Popedoms,
		with the old false Feudalities which he once saw clearly
		to be false;&#8212;considered that <em>he</em> would found &#8220;his
		Dynasty&#8221; and so forth; that the enormous French
		Revolution meant only that! The man was &#8216;given-up
		to strong delusion, that he should believe a lie;&#8217; a fearful
		but most sure thing. He did not know true from
		false now when he looked at them,&#8212;the fearfulest
		penalty a man pays for yielding to untruth of heart.
		<em>Self</em> and false ambition had now become his god: <em>self</em>-deception
		once yielded to, <em>all</em> other deceptions follow
		naturally more and more. What a paltry patch-work
		of theatrical paper-mantles, tinsel and mummery, had
		this man wrapt his own great reality in, thinking to
		make it more real thereby! His hollow Pope&#8217;s-<i>Concordat</i>,
		pretending to be a re-establishment of Catholicism,
		felt by himself to be the method of extirpating it,
		&#8220;<i>la vaccine de la religion</i>:&#8221; his ceremonial Coronations,
		consecrations by the old Italian Chimera in Notre-Dame,&#8212;&#8220;wanting
		nothing to complete the pomp of it,&#8221; as
		Augereau said, &#8220;nothing but the half-million of men
		who had died to put an end to all that&#8221;! Cromwell&#8217;s
		Inauguration was by the Sword and Bible; what we
		must call a genuinely <em>true</em> one. Sword and Bible were
		borne before him, without any chimera: were not these
		the <em>real</em> emblems of Puritanism; its true decoration and
		insignia? It had used them both in a very real manner,
		and pretended to stand by them now! But this poor
		Napoleon mistook: he believed too much in the <em>Dupeability</em>
		of men; saw no fact deeper in men than Hunger
		and this! He was mistaken. Like a man that should
		build upon cloud; his house and he fall down in confused
		wreck, and depart out of the world.</p>

		<p>Alas, in all of us this charlatan-element exists; and
		<em>might</em> be developed, were the temptation strong enough.
		&#8216;Lead us not into temptation&#8217;! But it is fatal, I say,
		that it <em>be</em> developed. The thing into which it enters
		as a cognisable ingredient is doomed to be altogether
		transitory; and, however huge it may <em>look</em>, is in itself
		small. Napoleon&#8217;s working, accordingly, what was it
		with all the noise it made? A flash as of gunpowder
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page466" name="page466"></a>466</span>wide-spread; a blazing-up as of dry heath. For an
		hour the whole Universe seems wrapt in smoke and
		flame; but only for an hour. It goes out: the Universe
		with its old mountains and streams, its stars
		above and kind soil beneath, is still there.</p>

		<p>The Duke of Weimar told his friends always, To be
		of courage; this Napoleonism was <em>unjust</em>, a falsehood,
		and could not last. It is true doctrine. The heavier
		this Napoleon trampled on the world, holding it tyrannously
		down, the fiercer would the world&#8217;s recoil against
		him be, one day. Injustice pays itself with frightful
		compound-interest. I am not sure but he had better
		have lost his best park of artillery, or had his best
		regiment drowned in the sea, than shot that poor
		German Bookseller, Palm! It was a palpable tyrannous
		murderous injustice, which no man, let him paint an
		inch thick, could make-out to be other. It burnt deep
		into the hearts of men, it and the like of it; suppressed
		fire flashed in the eyes of men, as they thought of it,&#8212;waiting
		their day! Which day <em>came</em>: Germany rose
		round him.&#8212;What Napoleon <em>did</em> will in the long-run
		amount to what he did <em>justly</em>; what Nature with her
		laws will sanction. To what of reality was in him; to
		that and nothing more. The rest was all smoke and
		waste. <i>La carrière ouverte aux talens</i>: that great true
		Message, which has yet to articulate and fulfil itself
		everywhere, he left in a most inarticulate state. He
		was a great <i>ébauche</i>, a rude-draught never completed;
		as indeed what great man is other? Left in <em>too</em> rude
		a state, alas!</p>

		<p>His notions of the world, as he expresses them there
		at St. Helena, are almost tragical to consider. He
		seems to feel the most unaffected surprise that it has
		all gone so; that he is flung-out on the rock here, and
		the World is still moving on its axis. France is great,
		and all-great; and at bottom, he is France. England
		itself, he says, is by Nature only an appendage of
		France; &#8220;another Isle of Oleron to France.&#8221; So it
		was <em>by Nature</em>, by Napoleon-Nature; and yet look how
		in fact,&#8212;<span class="special_emphasis">Here am I</span>! He cannot understand it: inconceivable
		that the reality has not corresponded to his
		program of it; that France was not all-great, that he
		<span class="pagenum"><a id="page467" name="page467"></a>467</span>was not France. &#8216;Strong delusion,&#8217; that he should
		believe the thing to be which <em>is</em> not! The compact,
		clear-seeing, decisive Italian nature of him, strong,
		genuine, which he once had, has enveloped itself, half-dissolved
		itself, in a turbid atmosphere of French fanfaronade.
		The world was not disposed to be trodden-down
		underfoot; to be bound into masses, and built
		together, as <em>he</em> liked, for a pedestal to France and him:
		the world had quite other purposes in view! Napoleon&#8217;s
		astonishment is extreme. But alas, what help
		now? He had gone that way of his; and Nature also
		had gone her way. Having once parted with Reality,
		he tumbles helpless in Vacuity; no rescue for him. He
		had to sink there, mournfully as man seldom did; and
		break his great heart, and die,&#8212;this poor Napoleon:
		a great implement too soon wasted, till it was useless:
		our last Great Man!</p>

		<p class="post_thoughtbreak"><em>Our</em> last, in a double sense. For here finally these
		wide roamings of ours through so many times and
		places, in search and study of Heroes, are to terminate.
		I am sorry for it: there was pleasure for me in this
		business, if also much pain. It is a great subject, and
		a most grave and wide one, this which, not to be too
		grave about it, I have named <i>Hero-worship</i>. It enters
		deeply, as I think, into the secret of Mankind&#8217;s ways
		and vitalest interests in this world, and is well worth
		explaining at present. With six months, instead of six
		days, we might have done better. I promised to break-ground
		on it; I know not whether I have even managed
		to do that. I have had to tear it up in the rudest
		manner in order to get into it at all. Often enough,
		with these abrupt utterances thrown-out isolated, unexplained,
		has your tolerance been put to the trial.
		Tolerance, patient candour, all-hoping favour and kindness,
		which I will not speak of at present. The accomplished
		and distinguished, the beautiful, the wise, something
		of what is best in England, have listened patiently
		to my rude words. With many feelings, I heartily
		thank you all; and say, Good be with you all!</p>

		<p><span class="pagenum blank_page"><a id="page468" name="page468"></a>468</span></p>
	</div>
</div>
<div id="index">
	<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="page469" name="page469"></a>469</span></p>
	<h2 class="section_title">INDEX</h2>
	<p class="index_linkers">
		<a href="#index_a">A</a> <a href="#index_b">B</a>
		<a href="#index_c">C</a> <a href="#index_d">D</a> <a href="#index_e">E</a>
		<a href="#index_f">F</a> <a href="#index_g">G</a> <a href="#index_h">H</a>
		<a href="#index_i">I</a> <a href="#index_j">J</a> <a href="#index_k">K</a>
		<a href="#index_l">L</a> <a href="#index_m">M</a><br />
		<a href="#index_n">N</a> <a href="#index_o">O</a> <a href="#index_p">P</a>
		<a href="#index_q">Q</a> <a href="#index_r">R</a> <a href="#index_s">S</a>
		<a href="#index_t">T</a> <a href="#index_u">U</a> <a href="#index_v">V</a>
		<a href="#index_w">W</a> <a href="#index_y">Y</a> <a href="#index_z">Z</a>
	</p>

	<ul id="index_a">
		<li><span class="first_word">Abdallah</span>, father of Mahomet, <a href="#page286">286</a></li>
		<li>Abelard, theology of, <a href="#page389">389</a></li>
		<li>Abu Thaleb, uncle of Mahomet, <a href="#page286">286</a>, <a href="#page387">387</a>, <a href="#page294">294</a></li>
		<li>Action the true end of Man, <a href="#page119">119</a>, <a href="#page121">121</a></li>
		<li>Actual, the, the true Ideal, <a href="#page148">148</a>, <a href="#page149">149</a></li>
		<li>Adamitism, <a href="#page43">43</a></li>
		<li>Afflictions, merciful, <a href="#page145">145</a></li>
		<li>Agincourt, Shakspeare&#8217;s battle of, <a href="#page341">341</a></li>
		<li>Alexis, Luther&#8217;s friend, his sudden death, <a href="#page359">359</a></li>
		<li>Ali, young, Mahomet&#8217;s kinsman and convert, <a href="#page293">293</a></li>
		<li>Allegory, the sportful shadow of earnest faith, <a href="#page243">243</a>, <a href="#page267">267</a></li>
		<li>Ambition, Fate&#8217;s appendage of, <a href="#page78">78</a>;
			<ul>
		  		<li>foolish charge of, <a href="#page447">447</a>;</li>
		  		<li>laudable ambition, <a href="#page449">449</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Apprenticeships, <a href="#page92">92</a></li>
		<li>Aprons, use and significance of, <a href="#page31">31</a></li>
		<li>Arabia and the Arabs, <a href="#page282">282</a>, <a href="#page310">310</a></li>
		<li>Art, all true Works of, symbolic, <a href="#page163">163</a></li>
	</ul>
	<ul id="index_b">
		<li><span class="first_word">Balder</span>, the white Sungod, <a href="#page255">255</a>, <a href="#page271">271</a></li>
		<li>Baphometic Fire-baptism, <a href="#page128">128</a></li>
		<li>Barebone&#8217;s Parliament, <a href="#page456">456</a></li>
		<li>Battle-field, a, <a href="#page131">131</a></li>
		<li>Battle, Life-, our, <a href="#page65">65</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>with Folly and Sin, <a href="#page94">94</a>, <a href="#page97">97</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Being, the boundless Phantasmagoria of, <a href="#page39">39</a></li>
		<li>Belief and Opinion, <a href="#page146">146</a>, <a href="#page147">147</a></li>
		<li>Belief, the true god-announcing miracle, <a href="#page292">292</a>, <a href="#page311">311</a>, <a href="#page375">375</a>, <a href="#page401">401</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>war of, <a href="#page430">430</a>.</li>
				<li><i>See</i> <a href="#index_religion">Religion</a>, <a href="#index_scepticism">Scepticism</a>.</li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Benthamism, <a href="#page309">309</a>, <a href="#page400">400</a></li>
		<li>Bible of Universal History, <a href="#page134">134</a>, <a href="#page146">146</a></li>
		<li>Biography, meaning and uses of, <a href="#page56">56</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>significance of biographic facts, <a href="#page152">152</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Blumine, <a href="#page104">104</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>her environment, <a href="#page105">105</a>;</li>
				<li>character and relation to Teufelsdröckh, <a href="#page106">106</a>;</li>
				<li>blissful bonds rent asunder, <a href="#page109">109</a>;</li>
				<li>on her way to England, <a href="#page116">116</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Bolivar&#8217;s Cavalry-uniform, <a href="#page37">37</a></li>
		<li id="index_books">Books, miraculous influence of, <a href="#page130">130</a>, <a href="#page149">149</a>, <a href="#page388">388</a>, <a href="#page392">392</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>our modern University, Church and Parliament, <a href="#page390">390</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Boswell, his reverence for Johnson, <a href="#page410">410</a></li>
		<li>Banyan&#8217;s <i>Pilgrim&#8217;s Progress</i>, <a href="#page244">244</a></li>
		<li>Burns, Gilbert, <a href="#page417">417</a></li>
		<li>Burns, Robert, his birth, and humble heroic parents, <a href="#page415">415</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>rustic dialect of, <a href="#page416">416</a>;</li>
				<li>the most gifted British soul of his century, <a href="#page417">417</a>;</li>
				<li>his resemblance to Mirabeau, <a href="#page418">418</a>;</li>
				<li>his sincerity, <a href="#page419">419</a>;</li>
				<li>his visit to Edinburgh, <a href="#page420">420</a>;</li>
				<li>Lion-hunters the ruin and death of, <a href="#page421">421</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
	</ul>
	<ul id="index_c">
		<li><span class="first_word">Caabah</span>, the, with its Black Stone and Sacred Well, <a href="#page284">284</a>, <a href="#page285">285</a></li>
		<li>Canopus, the worship of, <a href="#page247">247</a></li>
		<li>Charles I. fatally incapable of being dealt with, <a href="#page439">439</a></li>
		<li>Childhood, happy season of, <a href="#page68">68</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>early influences and sports, <a href="#page69">69</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>China, literary governors of, <a href="#page397">397</a></li>
		<li>Christian Faith, a good Mother&#8217;s simple version of the, <a href="#page75">75</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>Temple of the, now in ruins, <a href="#page145">145</a>;</li>
				<li>Passive-half of, <a href="#page147">147</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Christian Love, <a href="#page143">143</a>, <a href="#page145">145</a></li>
		<li>Church. <i>See</i> <a href="#index_books">Books</a>.</li>
		<li>Church-Clothes, <a href="#page161">161</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>living and dead Churches, <a href="#page162">162</a>;</li>
				<li>the modern Church, and its Newspaper-Pulpits, <a href="#page189">189</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Circumstances, influence of, <a href="#page71">71</a></li>
		<li>Clergy, the, with their surplices and cassock-aprons girt-on, <a href="#page32">32</a>, <a href="#page158">158</a></li>
		<li>Clothes, not a spontaneous growth of the human animal, but an artificial device, <a href="#page2">2</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>analogy between the Costumes of the body and the Customs of the spirit, <a href="#page25">25</a>;</li>
				<li>Decoration the first purpose of Clothes, <a href="#page28">28</a>;</li>
				<li>what Clothes have done for us, and what they threaten to do, <a href="#page30">30</a>, <a href="#page43">43</a>;</li>
				<li>fantastic garbs of the Middle Ages, <a href="#page34">34</a>;</li>
				<li>a simple costume, <a href="#page35">35</a>;</li>
				<li>tangible and mystic influences of Clothes, <a href="#page36">36</a>, <a href="#page45">45</a>;</li>
				<li>animal and human Clothing contrasted, <a href="#page41">41</a>;</li>
				<li>a Court-Ceremonial <i>minus</i> Clothes, <a href="#page45">45</a>;</li>
				<li>necessity for Clothes, <a href="#page47">47</a>;</li>
				<li>transparent Clothes, <a href="#page49">49</a>;</li>
				<li>all Emblematic things are Clothes, <a href="#page54">54</a>, <a href="#page203">203</a>;</li>
				<li>Genesis of the modern Clothes-Philosopher, <a href="#page61">61</a>;</li>
				<li>Character and conditions needed, <a href="#page153">153</a>, <a href="#page156">156</a>;</li>
				<li>George Fox&#8217;s suit of Leather, <a href="#page159">159</a>;</li>
				<li>Church-Clothes, <a href="#page161">161</a>;</li>
				<li>Old-Clothes, <a href="#page179">179</a>;</li>
				<li>practical inferences, <a href="#page203">203</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Codification, <a href="#page50">50</a></li>
		<li>Combination, value of, <a href="#page101">101</a>, <a href="#page221">221</a></li>
		<li>Commons, British House of, <a href="#page31">31</a></li>
		<li>Concealment. <i>See</i> <a href="#index_secrecy">Secrecy</a>.</li>
		<li>Constitution, our invaluable British, <a href="#page187">187</a></li>
		<li>Conversion, <a href="#page149">149</a></li>
		<li>Courtesy, due to all men, <a href="#page179">179</a></li>
		<li>Courtier, a luckless, <a href="#page36">36</a></li>
		<li>Cromwell, <a href="#page430">430</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>his hypochondria, <a href="#page437">437</a>, <a href="#page442">442</a>;</li>
				<li>early marriage and conversion, <a href="#page437">437</a>;</li>
				<li>an industrious farmer, <a href="#page438">438</a>;</li>
				<li>his victories and participation in the King&#8217;s death, <a href="#page439">439</a>;</li>
				<li>practicalness of, <a href="#page440">440</a>;</li>
				<li>his Ironsides, <a href="#page440">440</a>;</li>
				<li>his speeches, <a href="#page444">444</a>, <a href="#page459">459</a>;</li>
				<li>his &#8216;ambition&#8217; and such-like, <a href="#page446">446</a>;</li>
				<li>a &#8216;Fanatic,&#8217; but gradually became a &#8216;Hypocrite,&#8217; <a href="#page452">452</a>;</li>
				<li><span class="pagenum"><a id="page470" name="page470"></a>470</span>his dismissal of the Rump Parliament, <a href="#page456">456</a>;</li>
				<li>Protectorship and Parliamentary Futilities, <a href="#page457">457</a>;</li>
				<li>his last days, and closing sorrows, <a href="#page460">460</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Custom the greatest of Weavers, <a href="#page194">194</a></li>
	</ul>
	<ul id="index_d">
		<li><span class="first_word">Dandy</span>, mystic significance of the, <a href="#page204">204</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>dandy worship, <a href="#page206">206</a>;</li>
				<li>sacred books, <a href="#page208">208</a>;</li>
				<li>articles of faith, <a href="#page209">209</a>;</li>
				<li>a dandy household, <a href="#page213">213</a>;</li>
				<li>tragically undermined by growing Drudgery, <a href="#page214">214</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Dante and his Book, <a href="#page318">318</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>biography in his Book, and Portrait, <a href="#page319">319</a>;</li>
				<li>his birth, education and early career, <a href="#page319">319</a>, <a href="#page320">320</a>;</li>
				<li>his love for Beatrice Portinari, <a href="#page320">320</a>;</li>
				<li>unhappy marriage, <a href="#page320">320</a>;</li>
				<li>banishment, <a href="#page321">321</a>;</li>
				<li>uncourtier-like ways of, <a href="#page321">321</a>;</li>
				<li>his <i>Divina Commedia</i> genuinely a song, <a href="#page322">322</a>;</li>
				<li>the Unseen World, as figured in the Christianity of the Middle Ages, <a href="#page329">329</a>;</li>
				<li>the &#8216;uses&#8217; of Dante, <a href="#page332">332</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>David, the Hebrew King, <a href="#page281">281</a></li>
		<li>Death, nourishment even in, <a href="#page81">81</a>, <a href="#page127">127</a></li>
		<li>Della Scala, the court of, <a href="#page321">321</a></li>
		<li>Devil, internecine war with the, <a href="#page9">9</a>, <a href="#page90">90</a>, <a href="#page128">128</a>, <a href="#page139">139</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>cannot now so much as believe in him, <a href="#page127">127</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Dilettantes and Pedants, <a href="#page52">52</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>patrons of Literature, <a href="#page96">96</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Diodorus Siculus, <a href="#page284">284</a></li>
		<li>Diogenes, <a href="#page159">159</a></li>
		<li>Divine Right of Kings, <a href="#page424">424</a></li>
		<li>Doubt can only be removed by Action, <a href="#page147">147</a>.
			<ul>
				<li><i>See</i> <a href="#index_unbelief">Unbelief</a>.</li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Drudgery contrasted with Dandyism, <a href="#page210">210</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>&#8216;Communion of Drudges,&#8217; and what may come of it, <a href="#page214">214</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Duelling, a picture of, <a href="#page136">136</a></li>
		<li>Duty, no longer a divine Messenger and Guide, but a false earthly Fantasm, <a href="#page122">122</a>, <a href="#page123">123</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>infinite nature of, <a href="#page147">147</a>, <a href="#page309">309</a>;</li>
				<li>definition of, <a href="#page267">267</a>, <a href="#page298">298</a>;</li>
				<li>sceptical spiritual paralysis, <a href="#page398">398</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
	</ul>
	<ul id="index_e">
		<li><span class="first_word">Edda</span>, the Scandinavian, <a href="#page253">253</a></li>
		<li>Editor&#8217;s first acquaintance with Teufelsdröckh and his Philosophy of Clothes, <a href="#page4">4</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>efforts to make known his discovery to British readers, <a href="#page7">7</a>;</li>
				<li>admitted into the Teufelsdröckh watch-tower, <a href="#page14">14</a>, <a href="#page25">25</a>;</li>
				<li>first feels the pressure of his task, <a href="#page37">37</a>;</li>
				<li>his bulky Weissnichtwo Packet, <a href="#page55">55</a>;</li>
				<li>strenuous efforts to evolve some historic order out of such interminable documentary confusion, <a href="#page59">59</a>;</li>
				<li>partial success, <a href="#page67">67</a>, <a href="#page76">76</a>, <a href="#page117">117</a>;</li>
				<li>mysterious hints, <a href="#page152">152</a>, <a href="#page177">177</a>;</li>
				<li>astonishment and hesitation, <a href="#page163">163</a>;</li>
				<li>congratulations, <a href="#page201">201</a>;</li>
				<li>farewell, <a href="#page219">219</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Education, influence of early, <a href="#page71">71</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>insignificant portion depending on Schools, <a href="#page77">77</a>;</li>
				<li>educational Architects, <a href="#page79">79</a>;</li>
				<li>the inspired Thinker, <a href="#page171">171</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Eighteenth Century, the sceptical, <a href="#page398">398</a>, <a href="#page404">404</a>, <a href="#page433">433</a></li>
		<li>Eisleben, the birthplace of Luther, <a href="#page358">358</a></li>
		<li>Eliot, <a href="#page433">433</a>, <a href="#page434">434</a></li>
		<li>Elizabethan Era, the, <a href="#page334">334</a></li>
		<li>Emblems, all visible things, <a href="#page54">54</a></li>
		<li>Emigration, <a href="#page173">173</a></li>
		<li>Eternity, looking through Time, <a href="#page15">15</a>, <a href="#page55">55</a>, <a href="#page168">168</a></li>
		<li>Evil, Origin of, <a href="#page143">143</a></li>
		<li>Eyes and Spectacles, <a href="#page51">51</a></li>
	</ul>
	<ul id="index_f">
		<li><span class="first_word">Facts</span>, engraved Hierograms, for which the fewest have the key, <a href="#page153">153</a></li>
		<li>Faith, the one thing needful, <a href="#page122">122</a></li>
		<li id="index_fantasy">Fantasy, the true Heaven-gate or Hell-gate of man, <a href="#page109">109</a>, <a href="#page165">165</a></li>
		<li>Fashionable Novels, <a href="#page208">208</a></li>
		<li>Fatherhood, <a href="#page65">65</a></li>
		<li>Faults, his, not the criterion of any man 281</li>
		<li>Feebleness, the true misery, <a href="#page124">124</a></li>
		<li>Fichte&#8217;s theory of literary men, <a href="#page385">385</a></li>
		<li id="index_fire">Fire, and vital fire, <a href="#page53">53</a>, <a href="#page129">129</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>miraculous nature of, <a href="#page254">254</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Force, universal presence of, <a href="#page53">53</a></li>
		<li>Forms, necessity for, <a href="#page431">431</a></li>
		<li>Fortunatus&#8217; Wishing-hat, <a href="#page195">195</a>, <a href="#page197">197</a></li>
		<li>Fox&#8217;s, George, heavenward aspirations and earthly independence, <a href="#page159">159</a></li>
		<li><i>Fraser&#8217;s Magazine</i>, <a href="#page6">6</a>, <a href="#page227">227</a></li>
		<li>Frederick the Great, symbolic glimpse of, <a href="#page61">61</a></li>
		<li>Friendship, now obsolete, <a href="#page89">89</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>an incredible tradition, <a href="#page125">125</a>, <a href="#page174">174</a>;</li>
				<li>how it were possible, <a href="#page161">161</a>, <a href="#page221">221</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Frost. <i>See</i> <a href="#index_fire">Fire</a>.</li>
		<li>Futteral and his Wife, <a href="#page61">61</a></li>
		<li>Future, organic filaments of the, <a href="#page183">183</a></li>
	</ul>
	<ul id="index_g">
		<li><span class="first_word">Genius</span>, the world&#8217;s treatment of, <a href="#page94">94</a></li>
		<li id="index_german">German speculative thought, <a href="#page2">2</a>, <a href="#page9">9</a>, <a href="#page20">20</a>, <a href="#page24">24</a>, <a href="#page41">41</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>historical researches, <a href="#page26">26</a>, <a href="#page56">56</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Gerund-grinding, <a href="#page80">80</a></li>
		<li>Ghost, an authentic, <a href="#page198">198</a></li>
		<li>Giotto, his portrait of Dante, <a href="#page319">319</a></li>
		<li>God, the unslumbering, omnipresent, eternal, <a href="#page40">40</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>God&#8217;s presence manifested to our eyes and hearts, <a href="#page49">49</a>;</li>
				<li>an absentee God, <a href="#page122">122</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Goethe&#8217;s  inspired  melody,  190;
			<ul>
				<li>&#8216;characters,&#8217; 337;</li>
				<li>notablest of literary men, <a href="#page386">386</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Good, growth and propagation of, <a href="#page75">75</a></li>
		<li>Graphic, secret of being, <a href="#page325">325</a></li>
		<li>Gray&#8217;s misconception of Norse lore, <a href="#page270">270</a></li>
		<li>Great Men, <a href="#page134">134</a>.
			<ul>
				<li><i>See</i> <a href="#index_man">Man</a>.</li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Grimm the German Antiquary, and Odin, <a href="#page260">260</a></li>
		<li>Gullibility, blessings of, <a href="#page84">84</a></li>
		<li>Gunpowder, use of, <a href="#page29">29</a>, <a href="#page136">136</a></li>
	</ul>
	<ul id="index_h">
		<li><span class="first_word">Habit</span>, how, makes dullards of us all, <a href="#page42">42</a></li>
		<li>Hagar, the Well of, <a href="#page284">284</a>, <a href="#page285">285</a></li>
		<li>Half-men, <a href="#page139">139</a></li>
		<li>Hampden, <a href="#page433">433</a>, <a href="#page434">434</a></li>
		<li>Happiness, the whim of, <a href="#page144">144</a></li>
		<li>Hegira, the, <a href="#page295">295</a></li>
		<li>Heroes, Universal History of the united biographies of, <a href="#page139">139</a>, <a href="#page266">266</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>how &#8216;little critics&#8217; account for great men, <a href="#page250">250</a>;</li>
				<li>all Heroes fundamentally of the same stuff, <a href="#page265">265</a>, <a href="#page277">277</a>, <a href="#page312">312</a>, <a href="#page346">346</a>, <a href="#page383">383</a>, <a href="#page418">418</a>;</li>
				<li><span class="pagenum"><a id="page471" name="page471"></a>471</span>Intellect the primary outfit, <a href="#page338">338</a>;</li>
				<li>Heroism possible to all, <a href="#page358">358</a>, <a href="#page375">375</a>;</li>
				<li>no man a hero to a valet-soul, <a href="#page411">411</a>, <a href="#page433">433</a>, <a href="#page441">441</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li id="index_hero-worship">Hero-worship, the corner-stone of all Society, <a href="#page189">189</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>the tap-root of all Religion, <a href="#page248">248</a>-<a href="#page252">252</a>, <a href="#page277">277</a>;</li>
				<li>perennial in man, <a href="#page252">252</a>, <a href="#page317">317</a>, <a href="#page357">357</a>, <a href="#page428">428</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Heuschrecke and his biographic documents, <a href="#page7">7</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>his loose, zigzag, thin-visaged character, <a href="#page18">18</a>;</li>
				<li>unaccustomed eloquence, and interminable documentary superfluities, <a href="#page56">56</a>;</li>
				<li>bewildered darkness, <a href="#page223">223</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>History, all-inweaving tissue of, <a href="#page15">15</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>by what strange chances do we live in, <a href="#page36">36</a>;</li>
				<li>a perpetual Revelation, <a href="#page134">134</a>, <a href="#page148">148</a>, <a href="#page190">190</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Homer&#8217;s Iliad, <a href="#page169">169</a></li>
		<li>Hope, this world emphatically the place of, <a href="#page122">122</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>false shadows of, <a href="#page140">140</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Horse, his own tailor, <a href="#page41">41</a></li>
		<li>Hutchinson and Cromwell, <a href="#page433">433</a>, <a href="#page460">460</a></li>
	</ul>
	<ul id="index_i">
		<li><span class="first_word">Iceland</span>, the home of Norse Poets, <a href="#page253">253</a></li>
		<li>Ideal, the, exists only in the Actual, <a href="#page148">148</a>, <a href="#page149">149</a></li>
		<li>Idolatry, <a href="#page351">351</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>criminal only when insincere, <a href="#page353">353</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Igdrasil, the Life-Tree, <a href="#page257">257</a>, <a href="#page334">334</a></li>
		<li>Imagination. <i>See</i> <a href="#index_fantasy">Fantasy</a>.</li>
		<li>Immortality, a glimpse of, <a href="#page196">196</a></li>
		<li>Imposture, statistics of, <a href="#page84">84</a></li>
		<li>Independence, foolish parade of, <a href="#page175">175</a>, <a href="#page188">188</a></li>
		<li>Indifference, centre of, <a href="#page128">128</a></li>
		<li>Infant intuitions and acquirements, <a href="#page68">68</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>genius and dulness, <a href="#page71">71</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Inspiration, perennial, <a href="#page147">147</a>, <a href="#page157">157</a>, <a href="#page190">190</a></li>
		<li>Intellect, the summary of man&#8217;s gifts, <a href="#page338">338</a>, <a href="#page397">397</a></li>
		<li>Invention, <a href="#page29">29</a>, <a href="#page120">120</a></li>
		<li>Invisible, the, Nature the visible Garment of, <a href="#page41">41</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>invisible bonds, binding all Men together, <a href="#page45">45</a>;</li>
				<li>the Visible and Invisible, <a href="#page49">49</a>, <a href="#page164">164</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Irish, the, Poor-Slave, <a href="#page213">213</a></li>
		<li>Islam, <a href="#page291">291</a></li>
		<li>Isolation, <a href="#page81">81</a></li>
	</ul>
	<ul id="index_j">
		<li><span class="first_word">Jesus of Nazareth</span>, our divinest Symbol, <a href="#page168">168</a>, <a href="#page171">171</a></li>
		<li>Job, the Book of, <a href="#page284">284</a></li>
		<li>Johnson&#8217;s difficulties, poverty, hypochondria, <a href="#page405">405</a>, <a href="#page406">406</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>rude self-help; stands genuinely by the old formulas, <a href="#page406">406</a>;</li>
				<li>his noble unconscious sincerity, <a href="#page408">408</a>;</li>
				<li>twofold Gospel, of Prudence and hatred of Cant, <a href="#page409">409</a>;</li>
				<li>his <i>Dictionary</i>, <a href="#page410">410</a>;</li>
				<li>the brave old Samuel, <a href="#page411">411</a>, <a href="#page450">450</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Jötuns, <a href="#page254">254</a>, <a href="#page272">272</a></li>
		<li>Julius the Second, Pope, <a href="#page361">361</a></li>
	</ul>
	<ul id="index_k">
		<li><span class="first_word">Kadijah</span>, the good, Mahomet&#8217;s first Wife, <a href="#page288">288</a>, <a href="#page292">292</a></li>
		<li>King, our true, chosen for us in Heaven, <a href="#page187">187</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>the, a summary of all the various figures of Heroism, <a href="#page424">424</a>;</li>
				<li>indispensable in all movements of men, <a href="#page453">453</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Kingdom, a man&#8217;s, <a href="#page91">91</a></li>
		<li>Know thyself, and what thou canst work at, <a href="#page124">124</a></li>
		<li>Knox&#8217;s influence on Scotland, <a href="#page374">374</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>the bravest of all Scotchmen, <a href="#page376">376</a>;</li>
				<li>his unassuming career, <a href="#page377">377</a>;</li>
				<li>is sent to the French Galleys, <a href="#page377">377</a>;</li>
				<li>his colloquies with Queen Mary, <a href="#page378">378</a>;</li>
				<li>vein of drollery, <a href="#page380">380</a>;</li>
				<li>a brother to high and to low, <a href="#page380">380</a>;</li>
				<li>his death, <a href="#page381">381</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Koran, the, <a href="#page298">298</a></li>
		<li>Koreish, the, Keepers of the Caabah, <a href="#page293">293</a>, <a href="#page294">294</a>, <a href="#page354">354</a></li>
		<li>Kranach&#8217;s portrait of Luther, <a href="#page372">372</a></li>
	</ul>
	<ul id="index_l">
		<li id="index_labour"><span class="first_word">Labour</span>, sacredness of, <a href="#page171">171</a></li>
		<li>Ladrones Islands, what the natives of, thought regarding Fire, <a href="#page254">254</a></li>
		<li>Lamaism, Grand, <a href="#page242">242</a></li>
		<li>Land-owning, trade of, <a href="#page96">96</a></li>
		<li>Language, the Garment of Thought, <a href="#page54">54</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>dead vocables, <a href="#page80">80</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Laughter, significance of, <a href="#page24">24</a></li>
		<li>Leo X., the elegant Pagan Pope, <a href="#page363">363</a></li>
		<li>Liberty and Equality, <a href="#page357">357</a>, <a href="#page428">428</a></li>
		<li>Lieschen, <a href="#page17">17</a></li>
		<li>Life, Human, picture of, <a href="#page14">14</a>, <a href="#page115">115</a>, <a href="#page129">129</a>, <a href="#page141">141</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>life-purpose, <a href="#page101">101</a>;</li>
				<li>speculative mystery of, <a href="#page125">125</a>, <a href="#page181">181</a>, <a href="#page198">198</a>;</li>
				<li>the most important transaction in, <a href="#page128">128</a>;</li>
				<li>nothingness of; 138, <a href="#page139">139</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Light the beginning of all Creation, <a href="#page148">148</a></li>
		<li>Literary Men, <a href="#page383">383</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>in China, <a href="#page397">397</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Literature, chaotic condition of, <a href="#page387">387</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>not our heaviest evil, <a href="#page398">398</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Logic-mortar and wordy Air-Castles, <a href="#page40">40</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>underground workshop of Logic, <a href="#page50">50</a>, <a href="#page166">166</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Louis XV., ungodly age of, <a href="#page123">123</a></li>
		<li>Love, what we emphatically name, <a href="#page102">102</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>pyrotechnic phenomena of, <a href="#page103">103</a>, <a href="#page166">166</a>;</li>
				<li>not altogether a delirium, <a href="#page109">109</a>;</li>
				<li>how possible, in its highest form, <a href="#page145">145</a>, <a href="#page161">161</a>, <a href="#page221">221</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Ludicrous, feeling and instances of the, <a href="#page36">36</a>, <a href="#page136">136</a></li>
		<li>Luther&#8217;s birth and parentage, <a href="#page358">358</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>hardship and rigorous necessity;</li>
				<li>death of his friend Alexis, <a href="#page359">359</a>;</li>
				<li>becomes a monk;</li>
				<li>his religious despair;</li>
				<li>finds a Bible, <a href="#page360">360</a>;</li>
				<li>his deliverance from darkness;</li>
				<li>at Rome, <a href="#page361">361</a>;</li>
				<li>Tetzel, <a href="#page362">362</a>;</li>
				<li>burns the Pope&#8217;s Bull, <a href="#page363">363</a>, <a href="#page364">364</a>;</li>
				<li>at the Diet of Worms, <a href="#page364">364</a>;</li>
				<li>King of the Reformation, <a href="#page368">368</a>;</li>
				<li>&#8216;Duke Georges for nine days running,&#8217; 370;</li>
				<li>his little daughter&#8217;s deathbed;</li>
				<li>his solitary Patmos, <a href="#page371">371</a>;</li>
				<li>his Portrait, <a href="#page372">372</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
	</ul>
	<ul id="index_m">
		<li><span class="first_word">Magna Charta</span>, <a href="#page203">203</a></li>
		<li>Mahomet&#8217;s birth, boyhood, and youth, <a href="#page286">286</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>marries Kadijah, <a href="#page288">288</a>;</li>
				<li>quiet, unambitious life, <a href="#page288">288</a>;</li>
				<li>divine commission, <a href="#page290">290</a>;</li>
				<li>the good Kadijah believes him, <a href="#page292">292</a>;</li>
				<li><span class="pagenum"><a id="page472" name="page472"></a>472</span>Seid, his slave, <a href="#page293">293</a>;</li>
				<li>his Cousin Ali, <a href="#page293">293</a>;</li>
				<li>his offences and sore struggles, <a href="#page293">293</a>;</li>
				<li>flight from Mecca; being driven to take the sword, he uses it, <a href="#page295">295</a>;</li>
				<li>the Koran, <a href="#page298">298</a>;</li>
				<li>a veritable Hero, <a href="#page305">305</a>;</li>
				<li>Seid&#8217;s death, <a href="#page306">306</a>;</li>
				<li>freedom from cant, <a href="#page306">306</a>;</li>
				<li>the infinite nature of duty, <a href="#page309">309</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Malthus&#8217;s over-population panic, <a href="#page170">170</a></li>
		<li id="index_man">Man, by nature <em>naked</em>, <a href="#page2">2</a>, <a href="#page42">42</a>, <a href="#page46">46</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>essentially a tool-using animal, <a href="#page30">30</a>;</li>
				<li>the true Shekinah, <a href="#page49">49</a>;</li>
				<li>a divine Emblem, <a href="#page54">54</a>, <a href="#page165">165</a>, <a href="#page167">167</a>, <a href="#page180">180</a>, <a href="#page199">199</a>;</li>
				<li>two men alone honourable, <a href="#page171">171</a>.</li>
				<li><i>See</i> <a href="#index_thinking_man">Thinking Man</a>.</li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Mary, Queen, and Knox, <a href="#page378">378</a></li>
		<li>Mayflower, sailing of the, <a href="#page373">373</a></li>
		<li>Mecca, its rise, <a href="#page285">285</a>; Mahomet&#8217;s flight from, <a href="#page294">294</a>, <a href="#page295">295</a></li>
		<li>Metaphors, the stuff of Language, <a href="#page54">54</a></li>
		<li>Metaphysics inexpressibly unproductive, <a href="#page40">40</a>, <a href="#page51">51</a></li>
		<li>Middle Ages, represented by Dante and Shakspeare, <a href="#page329">329</a>, <a href="#page333">333</a></li>
		<li>Milton, <a href="#page124">124</a></li>
		<li>Mirabeau, his ambition, <a href="#page450">450</a></li>
		<li>Miracles, significance of, <a href="#page191">191</a>, <a href="#page197">197</a></li>
		<li>Monmouth Street, and its &#8216;Ou&#8217; clo&#8217;&#8217; Angels of Doom, <a href="#page181">181</a></li>
		<li>Montrose, the Hero-Cavalier, <a href="#page453">453</a>, <a href="#page454">454</a></li>
		<li>Mother&#8217;s, a, religious influence, <a href="#page75">75</a></li>
		<li>Motive-Millwrights, <a href="#page166">166</a></li>
		<li>Mountain scenery, <a href="#page115">115</a></li>
		<li>Musical, all deep things, <a href="#page317">317</a></li>
		<li>Mystery, all-pervading domain of, <a href="#page51">51</a></li>
	</ul>
	<ul id="index_n">
		<li><span class="first_word">Nakedness</span> and hypocritical Clothing, <a href="#page42">42</a>, <a href="#page47">47</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>a naked Court-Ceremonial, <a href="#page45">45</a>;</li>
				<li>a naked Duke addressing a naked House of Lords, <a href="#page46">46</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Names, significance and influence of, <a href="#page65">65</a>, <a href="#page195">195</a></li>
		<li>Napoleon and his Political Evangel, <a href="#page135">135</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>compared with Cromwell, <a href="#page461">461</a>;</li>
				<li>a portentous mixture of Quack and Hero, <a href="#page462">462</a>;</li>
				<li>his instinct for the practical, <a href="#page463">463</a>;</li>
				<li>his democratic <em>faith</em> 463;</li>
				<li>his hatred of Anarchy, <a href="#page464">464</a>;</li>
				<li>apostatised from his old faith in Facts, and took to believing in Semblances, <a href="#page464">464</a>, <a href="#page465">465</a>;</li>
				<li>this Napoleonism was <em>unjust</em>, and could not last, <a href="#page466">466</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Nature, the God-written Apocalypse of,39, <a href="#page49">49</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>not an Aggregate but a Whole, <a href="#page52">52</a>, <a href="#page116">116</a>, <a href="#page185">185</a>, <a href="#page193">193</a>;</li>
				<li>Nature alone antique, <a href="#page79">79</a>;</li>
				<li>sympathy with, <a href="#page115">115</a>, <a href="#page135">135</a>;</li>
				<li>the &#8216;Living Garment of God,&#8217; 142;</li>
				<li>Laws of Nature, <a href="#page192">192</a>;</li>
				<li>all one great Miracle, <a href="#page245">245</a>, <a href="#page302">302</a>, <a href="#page371">371</a>;</li>
				<li>a righteous umpire, <a href="#page296">296</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Necessity, brightened into Duty, <a href="#page74">74</a></li>
		<li>Newspaper Editors, <a href="#page33">33</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>our Mendicant Friars, <a href="#page189">189</a>, <a href="#page190">190</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Nothingness of life, <a href="#page138">138</a>, <a href="#page139">139</a></li>
		<li>Nottingham bargemen, <a href="#page255">255</a>, <a href="#page256">256</a></li>
		<li>Novalis, on Man, <a href="#page248">248</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>on Belief, <a href="#page292">292</a>;</li>
				<li>on Shakspeare, <a href="#page339">339</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
	</ul>
	<ul id="index_o">
		<li><span class="first_word">Obedience</span>, the lesson of, <a href="#page74">74</a>, <a href="#page75">75</a></li>
		<li>Odin, the first Norse &#8216;man of genius,&#8217; 258;
			<ul>
				<li>historic rumours and guesses, <a href="#page259">259</a>;</li>
				<li>how he came to be deified, <a href="#page261">261</a>;</li>
				<li>invented &#8216;runes,&#8217; 263;</li>
				<li>Hero, Prophet, God, <a href="#page264">264</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Olaf, King, and Thor, <a href="#page275">275</a></li>
		<li>Original man the <em>sincere</em> man, <a href="#page280">280</a>, <a href="#page356">356</a></li>
		<li>Orpheus, <a href="#page197">197</a></li>
		<li>Over-population, <a href="#page170">170</a></li>
		<li>Own, conservation of a man&#8217;s, <a href="#page151">151</a></li>
	</ul>
	<ul id="index_p">
		<li><span class="first_word">Paganism</span>, Scandinavian, <a href="#page241">241</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>not mere Allegory, <a href="#page243">243</a>;</li>
				<li>Nature-worship, <a href="#page245">245</a>, <a href="#page266">266</a>;</li>
				<li>Hero-worship, <a href="#page248">248</a>;</li>
				<li>creed of our fathers, <a href="#page253">253</a>, <a href="#page272">272</a>, <a href="#page274">274</a>;</li>
				<li>Impersonation of the visible workings of Nature, <a href="#page254">254</a>;</li>
				<li>contrasted with Greek Paganism, <a href="#page256">256</a>;</li>
				<li>the first Norse Thinker, <a href="#page258">258</a>;</li>
				<li>main practical Belief; indispensable to be brave, <a href="#page267">267</a>;</li>
				<li>hearty, homely, rugged Mythology, <a href="#page270">270</a>;</li>
				<li>Balder and Thor, <a href="#page271">271</a>;</li>
				<li>Consecration of Valour, <a href="#page276">276</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Paradise and Fig-leaves, <a href="#page27">27</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>prospective Paradises, <a href="#page102">102</a>, <a href="#page110">110</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Parliaments superseded by Books, <a href="#page392">392</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>Cromwell&#8217;s Parliaments, <a href="#page454">454</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Passivity and Activity, <a href="#page74">74</a>, <a href="#page121">121</a></li>
		<li>Past, the, inextricably linked with the Present, <a href="#page129">129</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>forever extant, <a href="#page196">196</a>;</li>
				<li>the whole, the possession of the Present, <a href="#page277">277</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Paupers, what to do with, <a href="#page173">173</a></li>
		<li>Peace-Era, the much-predicted, <a href="#page133">133</a></li>
		<li>Peasant Saint, the, <a href="#page172">172</a></li>
		<li><i>Pelham</i>, and the Whole Duty of Dandies, <a href="#page209">209</a></li>
		<li>Perseverance, law of, <a href="#page178">178</a></li>
		<li>Person, mystery of a, <a href="#page48">48</a>, <a href="#page101">101</a>, <a href="#page103">103</a>, <a href="#page179">179</a></li>
		<li>Philosophies, Cause-and-Effect, <a href="#page26">26</a></li>
		<li>Phœnix Death-birth, <a href="#page178">178</a>, <a href="#page183">183</a>, <a href="#page201">201</a></li>
		<li>Pitt, Mr., his reply when asked for help to Burns, <a href="#page396">396</a></li>
		<li>Plato, the child-man of, <a href="#page245">245</a></li>
		<li>Poet, the, and Prophet, <a href="#page313">313</a>, <a href="#page332">332</a>, <a href="#page342">342</a></li>
		<li id="index_poetry">Poetry and Prose, distinction of, <a href="#page315">315</a>, <a href="#page323">323</a></li>
		<li>Popery, <a href="#page367">367</a></li>
		<li>Poverty, advantages of, <a href="#page334">334</a></li>
		<li>Priest, the true, a kind of Prophet, <a href="#page346">346</a></li>
		<li>Printing, consequences of, <a href="#page392">392</a></li>
		<li>Private judgment, <a href="#page354">354</a></li>
		<li>Progress of the Species, <a href="#page349">349</a></li>
		<li>Property, <a href="#page150">150</a></li>
		<li>Prose. <i>See</i> <a href="#index_poetry">Poetry</a>.</li>
		<li>Proselytising, <a href="#page6">6</a>, <a href="#page221">221</a></li>
		<li>Protestantism, the root of Modern European History, <a href="#page364">364</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>not dead yet, <a href="#page367">367</a>;</li>
				<li>its living fruit, <a href="#page373">373</a>, <a href="#page425">425</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Purgatory, noble Catholic conception of, <a href="#page328">328</a></li>
		<li>Puritanism, founded by Knox, <a href="#page373">373</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>true beginning of America, <a href="#page373">373</a>;</li>
				<li>the one epoch of Scotland, <a href="#page374">374</a>;</li>
				<li>Theocracy, <a href="#page381">381</a>;</li>
				<li>Puritanism in England, <a href="#page430">430</a>, <a href="#page432">432</a>, <a href="#page453">453</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Pym, <a href="#page433">433</a>, <a href="#page434">434</a></li>
	</ul>
	<ul id="index_q">
		<li><span class="first_word">Quackery</span> originates nothing, <a href="#page242">242</a>, <a href="#page279">279</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>age of, <a href="#page403">403</a>;</li>
				<li>Quacks and Dupes, <a href="#page441">441</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
	</ul>
	<ul id="index_r">
		<li><span class="pagenum"><a id="page473" name="page473"></a>473</span><span class="first_word">Radicalism</span>, Speculative, <a href="#page10">10</a>, <a href="#page20">20</a>, <a href="#page47">47</a>, <a href="#page188">188</a></li>
		<li>Ragnarök, <a href="#page275">275</a></li>
		<li>Raleigh&#8217;s, Sir Walter, fine mantle, <a href="#page36">36</a></li>
		<li>Ramadhan, the month of, <a href="#page290">290</a></li>
		<li>Raphael, the best of Portrait-Painters, <a href="#page326">326</a></li>
		<li>Reformer, the true, <a href="#page347">347</a></li>
		<li id="index_religion">Religion, dead letter and living spirit of, <a href="#page87">87</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>weaving new vestures, <a href="#page162">162</a>, <a href="#page207">207</a>;</li>
				<li>a man&#8217;s, the chief fact with regard to him, <a href="#page240">240</a>;</li>
				<li>based on Hero-worship, <a href="#page248">248</a>;</li>
				<li>propagating by the sword, <a href="#page295">295</a>;</li>
				<li>cannot succeed by being &#8216;easy,&#8217; 304</li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Reverence, early growth of, <a href="#page75">75</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>indispensability of, <a href="#page188">188</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Revolution, <a href="#page423">423</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>the French, <a href="#page423">423</a>, <a href="#page461">461</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Richter, <a href="#page24">24</a>, <a href="#page369">369</a></li>
		<li>Right and Wrong, <a href="#page309">309</a>, <a href="#page329">329</a></li>
		<li>Rousseau, not a strong man, <a href="#page411">411</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>his Portrait;</li>
				<li>egoism, <a href="#page412">412</a>;</li>
				<li>his passionate appeals, <a href="#page413">413</a>;</li>
				<li>his books, like himself, unhealthy; the Evangelist of the French Revolution, <a href="#page414">414</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Runes, <a href="#page263">263</a>, <a href="#page264">264</a>, <a href="#page388">388</a></li>
	</ul>
	<ul id="index_s">
		<li><span class="first_word">Sabeans</span>, the worship of, <a href="#page247">247</a>, <a href="#page283">283</a></li>
		<li>Sæmund, an early Christian priest, <a href="#page253">253</a>, <a href="#page254">254</a></li>
		<li>St. Clement Danes, Church of, <a href="#page407">407</a></li>
		<li>Saints, living Communion of, <a href="#page185">185</a>, <a href="#page190">190</a></li>
		<li>Sarcasm, the panoply of, <a href="#page99">99</a></li>
		<li><i>Sartor Resartus</i>, genesis of, <a href="#page7">7</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>its purpose, <a href="#page201">201</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Saturn or Chronos, <a href="#page98">98</a></li>
		<li>Savage, the aboriginal, <a href="#page28">28</a></li>
		<li>Scarecrow, significance of the, <a href="#page46">46</a></li>
		<li>Sceptical goose-cackle, <a href="#page51">51</a></li>
		<li id="index_scepticism">Scepticism, a spiritual paralysis, <a href="#page398">398</a>-<a href="#page405">405</a>, <a href="#page433">433</a></li>
		<li>Schlegel, August Wilhelm, <a href="#page341">341</a></li>
		<li>School education, insignificance of, <a href="#page78">78</a>, <a href="#page80">80</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>tin-kettle terrors and incitements, <a href="#page78">78</a>;</li>
				<li>need of Soul-Architects, <a href="#page80">80</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Science, the Torch of, <a href="#page1">1</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>the Scientific Head, <a href="#page51">51</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Scotland awakened into life by Knox, <a href="#page374">374</a></li>
		<li id="index_secrecy">Secrecy, benignant efficacies of, <a href="#page164">164</a></li>
		<li>Secret, the open, <a href="#page313">313</a></li>
		<li>Seid, Mahomet&#8217;s slave and friend, <a href="#page293">293</a>, <a href="#page306">306</a></li>
		<li>Self-activity, <a href="#page20">20</a></li>
		<li>Self-annihilation, <a href="#page141">141</a></li>
		<li>Shakspeare and the Elizabethan Era, <a href="#page334">334</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>his all-sufficing intellect, <a href="#page335">335</a>, <a href="#page338">338</a>;</li>
				<li>his Characters, <a href="#page337">337</a>;</li>
				<li>his Dramas, a part of Nature herself, <a href="#page340">340</a>;</li>
				<li>his joyful tranquillity, and overflowing love of laughter, <a href="#page340">340</a>;</li>
				<li>his hearty Patriotism, <a href="#page342">342</a>;</li>
				<li>glimpses of the world that was in him, <a href="#page342">342</a>;</li>
				<li>a heaven-sent Light-Bringer, <a href="#page343">343</a>;</li>
				<li>a King of Saxondom, <a href="#page345">345</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Shame, divine, mysterious growth of, <a href="#page30">30</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>the soil of all Virtue, <a href="#page165">165</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Shekinah, Man the true, <a href="#page247">247</a></li>
		<li id="index_silence">Silence, <a href="#page135">135</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>the element in which all great things fashion themselves, <a href="#page164">164</a>;</li>
				<li>the great empires of, <a href="#page333">333</a>, <a href="#page449">449</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Simon&#8217;s, Saint-, aphorism of the golden age, <a href="#page178">178</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>a false application, <a href="#page223">223</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Sincerity, better than gracefulness, <a href="#page267">267</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>the first characteristic of heroism and originality, <a href="#page280">280</a>, <a href="#page289">289</a>, <a href="#page356">356</a>, <a href="#page358">358</a>, <a href="#page384">384</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Smoke, advantage of consuming one&#8217;s, <a href="#page114">114</a></li>
		<li>Snorro, his description of Odin, <a href="#page260">260</a>, <a href="#page264">264</a>, <a href="#page268">268</a></li>
		<li>Society founded upon Cloth, <a href="#page38">38</a>, <a href="#page45">45</a>, <a href="#page47">47</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>how Society becomes possible, <a href="#page162">162</a>;</li>
				<li>social Death and New-Birth, <a href="#page163">163</a>, <a href="#page178">178</a>, <a href="#page183">183</a>, <a href="#page201">201</a>;</li>
				<li>as good as extinct, <a href="#page174">174</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Solitude. <i>See</i> <a href="#index_silence">Silence</a>.</li>
		<li>Sorrow-pangs of Self-deliverance, <a href="#page115">115</a>, <a href="#page120">120</a>, <a href="#page121">121</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>divine depths of Sorrow, <a href="#page143">143</a>;</li>
				<li>Worship of Sorrow, <a href="#page146">146</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Southey, and Literature, <a href="#page396">396</a></li>
		<li>Space and Time, the Dream-Canvas upon which Life is imaged, <a href="#page40">40</a>, <a href="#page49">49</a>, <a href="#page192">192</a>, <a href="#page195">195</a></li>
		<li>Spartan wisdom, <a href="#page172">172</a></li>
		<li>Speculative intuition, <a href="#page38">38</a>.
			<ul>
				<li><i>See</i> <a href="#index_german">German</a>.</li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Speech, great, but not greatest, <a href="#page164">164</a></li>
		<li>Sphinx-riddle, the Universe a, <a href="#page97">97</a></li>
		<li>Star worship, <a href="#page247">247</a>, <a href="#page283">283</a></li>
		<li>Stealing, <a href="#page151">151</a>, <a href="#page172">172</a></li>
		<li>Stupidity, blessings of, <a href="#page123">123</a></li>
		<li>Style, varieties of, <a href="#page54">54</a></li>
		<li>Suicide, <a href="#page126">126</a></li>
		<li>Summary, <a href="#page231">231</a></li>
		<li>Sunset, <a href="#page70">70</a>, <a href="#page116">116</a></li>
		<li>Swallows, migrations and co-operative instincts of, <a href="#page72">72</a></li>
		<li>Swineherd, the, <a href="#page70">70</a></li>
		<li>Symbols, <a href="#page163">163</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>wondrous agency of, <a href="#page164">164</a>;</li>
				<li>extrinsic and intrinsic, <a href="#page167">167</a>;</li>
				<li>superannuated, <a href="#page169">169</a>, <a href="#page175">175</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
	</ul>
	<ul id="index_t">
		<li><span class="first_word">Tabûc</span>, the War of, <a href="#page306">306</a></li>
		<li>Tailors, symbolic significance of, <a href="#page217">217</a></li>
		<li>Temptations in the wilderness, <a href="#page138">138</a></li>
		<li>Testimonies of Authors, <a href="#page227">227</a></li>
		<li>Tetzel, the Monk, <a href="#page362">362</a>, <a href="#page363">363</a></li>
		<li>Teufelsdröckh&#8217;s Philosophy of Clothes, <a href="#page4">4</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>he proposes a toast, <a href="#page10">10</a>;</li>
				<li>his personal aspect, and silent deep-seated Sansculottism, <a href="#page11">11</a>;</li>
				<li>thawed into speech, <a href="#page13">13</a>;</li>
				<li>memorable watch-tower utterances, <a href="#page14">14</a>;</li>
				<li>alone with the Stars, <a href="#page16">16</a>;</li>
				<li>extremely miscellaneous environment, <a href="#page17">17</a>;</li>
				<li>plainness of speech, <a href="#page21">21</a>;</li>
				<li>universal learning, and multiplex literary style, <a href="#page22">22</a>;</li>
				<li>ambiguous-looking morality, <a href="#page23">23</a>;</li>
				<li>one instance of laughter, <a href="#page24">24</a>;</li>
				<li>almost total want of arrangement, <a href="#page25">25</a>;</li>
				<li>feeling of the ludicrous, <a href="#page36">36</a>;</li>
				<li>speculative Radicalism, <a href="#page47">47</a>;</li>
				<li>a singular Character, <a href="#page58">58</a>;</li>
				<li>Genesis properly an Exodus, <a href="#page62">62</a>;</li>
				<li>unprecedented Name, <a href="#page65">65</a>;</li>
				<li>infantine experience, <a href="#page66">66</a>;</li>
				<li>Pedagogy, <a href="#page76">76</a>;</li>
				<li>an almost Hindoo Passivity, <a href="#page76">76</a>;</li>
				<li>schoolboy jostling, <a href="#page79">79</a>;</li>
				<li>heterogeneous University  Life, <a href="#page83">83</a>;</li>
				<li>fever-paroxysms of Doubt, <a href="#page87">87</a>;</li>
				<li>first practical knowledge of the English, <a href="#page88">88</a>;</li>
				<li>getting under way, <a href="#page90">90</a>;</li>
				<li>ill success, <a href="#page94">94</a>;</li>
				<li>glimpse of high life, <a href="#page96">96</a>;</li>
				<li><span class="pagenum"><a id="page474" name="page474"></a>474</span>casts himself on the Universe, <a href="#page101">101</a>;</li>
				<li>reverent feeling towards Women, <a href="#page102">102</a>;</li>
				<li>frantically in love, <a href="#page104">104</a>;</li>
				<li>first interview with Blumine, <a href="#page106">106</a>;</li>
				<li>inspired moments, <a href="#page108">108</a>;</li>
				<li>short of practical kitchen-stuff, <a href="#page111">111</a>;</li>
				<li>ideal bliss and actual catastrophe, <a href="#page112">112</a>;</li>
				<li>sorrows and peripatetic stoicism, <a href="#page113">113</a>;</li>
				<li>a parting glimpse of his Beloved on her way to England, <a href="#page116">116</a>;</li>
				<li>how he overran the whole earth, <a href="#page118">118</a>;</li>
				<li>Doubt darkened unto Unbelief, <a href="#page122">122</a>;</li>
				<li>love of Truth, <a href="#page124">124</a>;</li>
				<li>a feeble unit, amidst a threatening Infinitude, <a href="#page125">125</a>;</li>
				<li>Baphometic Fire-baptism, <a href="#page128">128</a>;</li>
				<li>placid indifference, <a href="#page129">129</a>;</li>
				<li>a Hyperborean intruder, <a href="#page136">136</a>;</li>
				<li>Nothingness of life, <a href="#page138">138</a>;</li>
				<li>Temptations in the wilderness, <a href="#page138">138</a>;</li>
				<li>dawning of a better day, <a href="#page141">141</a>;</li>
				<li>the Ideal in the Actual, <a href="#page148">148</a>;</li>
				<li>finds his true Calling, <a href="#page149">149</a>;</li>
				<li>his Biography a symbolic Adumbration, significant to those who can decipher it, <a href="#page152">152</a>;</li>
				<li>a wonder-lover, seeker and worker, <a href="#page156">156</a>;</li>
				<li>in Monmouth Street among the Hebrews, <a href="#page181">181</a>;</li>
				<li>concluding hints, <a href="#page219">219</a>;</li>
				<li>his public History not yet done, perhaps the better part only beginning, <a href="#page223">223</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Theocracy, a, striven for by all true Reformers, <a href="#page382">382</a>, <a href="#page451">451</a></li>
		<li id="index_thinking_man">Thinking Man, a, the worst enemy of the Prince of Darkness, <a href="#page91">91</a>, <a href="#page150">150</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>true Thought can never die, <a href="#page185">185</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li id="index_thor">Thor, and his adventures, <a href="#page255">255</a>, <a href="#page271">271</a>-<a href="#page274">274</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>his last appearance, <a href="#page275">275</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Thought, miraculous influence of, <a href="#page258">258</a>, <a href="#page266">266</a>, <a href="#page393">393</a>;
			<ul>
				<li><em>musical</em> Thought, <a href="#page316">316</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Thunder. <i>See</i> <a href="#index_thor">Thor</a>.</li>
		<li>Time, the great mystery of, <a href="#page246">246</a></li>
		<li>Time-Spirit, life-battle with the, <a href="#page65">65</a>, <a href="#page98">98</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>Time, the universal wonder-hider, <a href="#page197">197</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Titles of Honour, <a href="#page186">186</a></li>
		<li>Tolerance, true and false, <a href="#page368">368</a>, <a href="#page379">379</a></li>
		<li>Tools, influence of, <a href="#page30">30</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>the Pen, most miraculous of tools, <a href="#page150">150</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Trial by Jury, Burke&#8217;s opinion of, <a href="#page422">422</a></li>
		<li>Turenne, <a href="#page312">312</a></li>
	</ul>
	<ul id="index_u">
		<li id="index_unbelief"><span class="first_word">Unbelief</span>, era of, <a href="#page86">86</a>, <a href="#page112">112</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>Doubt darkening into, <a href="#page121">121</a>;</li>
				<li>escape from, <a href="#page139">139</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Universities, <a href="#page83">83</a>, <a href="#page389">389</a></li>
		<li>Utgard, Thor&#8217;s expedition to, <a href="#page273">273</a>, <a href="#page274">274</a></li>
		<li>Utilitarianism, <a href="#page121">121</a>, <a href="#page176">176</a></li>
	</ul>
	<ul id="index_v">
		<li><span class="first_word">Valkyrs</span>, the, <a href="#page267">267</a>, <a href="#page268">268</a></li>
		<li>Valour, the basis of all virtue, <a href="#page268">268</a>, <a href="#page271">271</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>Norse consecration of, <a href="#page276">276</a>;</li>
				<li>Christian Valour, <a href="#page351">351</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li><i>Vates</i>, the, <a href="#page313">313</a>, <a href="#page314">314</a>, <a href="#page317">317</a></li>
		<li>View-hunting and diseased Self-consciousness, <a href="#page117">117</a></li>
		<li>Voltaire, <a href="#page146">146</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>the Parisian Divinity, <a href="#page189">189</a>;</li>
				<li>Voltaire-worship, <a href="#page251">251</a>, <a href="#page252">252</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
	</ul>
	<ul id="index_w">
		<li><span class="first_word">War</span>, <a href="#page131">131</a></li>
		<li>Wisdom, <a href="#page50">50</a></li>
		<li>Wish, the Norse god, <a href="#page255">255</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>enlarged into a heaven by Mahomet, <a href="#page310">310</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Woman&#8217;s influence, <a href="#page102">102</a></li>
		<li>Wonder the basis of Worship, <a href="#page50">50</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>region of, <a href="#page51">51</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Words, slavery to, <a href="#page40">40</a>;
			<ul>
				<li>Word-mongering and Motive-grinding, <a href="#page123">123</a></li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Workshop of Life, <a href="#page149">149</a>.
			<ul>
				<li><i>See</i> <a href="#index_labour">Labour</a>.</li>
			</ul>
		</li>
		<li>Worms, Luther at, <a href="#page364">364</a></li>
		<li>Worship, transcendent wonder, <a href="#page247">247</a>.
			<ul>
				<li><i>See</i> <a href="#index_hero-worship">Hero-worship</a>.</li>
			</ul>
		</li>
	</ul>
	<ul id="index_y">
		<li><span class="first_word">Young</span> Men and Maidens, <a href="#page97">97</a></li>
	</ul>
	<ul id="index_z">
		<li><span class="first_word">Zemzem</span>, the sacred Well, <a href="#page284">284</a></li>
	</ul>

</div>
<div id="the_end">
	<p class="headline">THE END</p>
</div>
